                                         GraphMERT: Efficient and Scalable Distillation of Reliable
                                         Knowledge Graphs from Unstructured Data

                                         Margarita Belova                                                                    margarita.bel@princeton.edu
                                         Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University

                                         Jiaxin Xiao                                                                               jx0800@princeton.edu
                                         Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University

                                         Shikhar Tuli                                                                         stuli@alumni.princeton.edu




arXiv:2510.09580v1 [cs.AI] 10 Oct 2025
                                         Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University

                                         Niraj K. Jha                                                                                  jha@princeton.edu
                                         Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University



                                                                                          Abstract

                                                 Researchers have pursued neurosymbolic artificial intelligence (AI) applications for nearly
                                                 three decades because symbolic components provide abstraction while neural components
                                                 provide generalization. Thus, a marriage of the two components can lead to rapid ad-
                                                 vancements in AI. Yet, the field has not realized this promise since most neurosymbolic AI
                                                 frameworks fail to scale. In addition, the implicit representations and approximate reason-
                                                 ing of purely neural approaches limit interpretability and trust. Knowledge graphs (KGs),
                                                 a gold-standard representation of explicit semantic knowledge, can address the symbolic
                                                 side. However, automatically deriving reliable KGs from text corpora has remained an open
                                                 problem. We address the above challenges by introducing GraphMERT, a tiny graphi-
                                                 cal encoder-only model that distills high-quality KGs from unstructured text corpora and
                                                 its own internal representations. Together, GraphMERT and its equivalent KG form a
                                                 modular neurosymbolic stack: neural learning of abstractions; symbolic KGs for verifiable
                                                 reasoning. GraphMERT + KG is the first efficient and scalable neurosymbolic model to
                                                 achieve state-of-the-art benchmark accuracy along with superior symbolic representations
                                                 relative to baselines.
                                                 More concretely, we target reliable domain-specific KGs that are both (1) factual (with prove-
                                                 nance) and (2) valid (ontology-consistent relations with domain-appropriate semantics).
                                                 When an off-the-shelf large language model (LLM), e.g., Qwen3-32B, generates domain-
                                                 specific KGs, it falls short on the reliability front due to prompt sensitivity, shallow domain
                                                 expertise, and hallucinated relations. Thus, practitioners should avoid employing LLM-
                                                 generated KGs in high-stakes domains, e.g., medicine, law, business, education, etc. On
                                                 text obtained from PubMed papers related to diabetes, our KG extraction pipeline with a
                                                 small 80M-parameter GraphMERT yields a KG with a 69.8% FActScore; a 32B-parameter
                                                 baseline LLM yields a KG that achieves only a 40.2% FActScore. The GraphMERT-
                                                 extracted KG also achieves a significantly higher ValidityScore of 68.8%, compared to an
                                                 LLM-generated baseline (43.0%), demonstrating its ability to preserve ontology alignment.
                                                 Finally, human experts can edit and audit the extracted KGs, further increasing their relia-
                                                 bility. This is nearly impossible with purely-neural representations. Hence, GraphMERT
                                                 enables efficient, scalable, transparent (interpretable and explainable), attributable (with
                                                 provenance), accountable (with governance), editable, auditable, and continually improv-
                                                 able state-of-the-art neurosymbolic AI.

                                                 Index Terms: Hallucinations, interpretability, knowledge graphs, language models, neu-
                                                 rosymbolic methods, retrieval-augmented generation.


                                                                                               1
1   Introduction

Artificial intelligence (AI) has long oscillated between two dominant paradigms: symbolic reasoning and
neural learning (Shavlik et al., 1991; d’Avila Garcez et al., 2002). Symbolic systems excel at explicit (rule-
based) inference, providing interpretability and strong exact reasoning. This assumes precise and consistent
symbolic abstractions. However, such systems struggle with noisy or ambiguous data. Neural approaches,
by contrast, thrive on large-scale and general-purpose pattern recognition, often outperforming hand-coded
explicit representations (Sutton, 2019). Nevertheless, neural networks operate as black boxes, offering lit-
tle transparency in their decision-making (Sharkey et al., 2025). Their representations are approximate:
ambiguous, difficult to control, and not grounded in explicit rules. Thus, each paradigm, taken alone, has
critical gaps. Neurosymbolic AI is a synthesis of the two paradigms, aiming to combine the flexibility of
neural models with the rigor and interpretability of symbolic systems. By uniting these complementary
strengths, it opens up a path toward systems capable of both scalable learning and sound reasoning — a
longstanding ambition of the field (Garcez & Lamb, 2023; Towell, 1994; d’Avila Garcez et al., 2019).
Large language models (LLMs) have generated enormous excitement, but their reasoning is ultimately prob-
abilistic and often unable to perform causal inference, opaque to humans, and prone to hallucinations,
especially during multi-step reasoning (Marcus, 2018; Ji et al., 2023). Their opaqueness raises serious con-
cerns about whether such models can be trusted (von Eschenbach, 2021; Alzubaidi et al., 2023). LLMs
trained on general text corpora may also fail to adapt to specialized domains or incorporate new knowl-
edge without undergoing expensive retraining (Zhao et al., 2025). These limitations highlight the need for
external, explicit sources of factual grounding in high-stakes use cases (Fan et al., 2024).
Unifying knowledge graphs (KGs) with LLMs could help overcome some of these limitations, as KGs offer
a natural complement (Ibrahim et al., 2024). By encoding knowledge in a structured, symbolic form of
head-relation-tail triples with explicit and verifiable relations, KGs offer interpretability, auditability, and
domain-specific depth that LLMs lack (Pan et al., 2023a). Thus, KGs can guide LLM inference and enable
robust evolution of background knowledge, while LLMs contribute flexible reasoning, efficient handling of
ambiguity through approximate inference, and serve as a natural language interface (Pan et al., 2023b). This
synergy can enable KG-guided exploration and learning, support agentic workflows driven by interaction with
an editable knowledge base, and enhance the trustworthiness of LLMs in high-stakes application domains
by reinforcing factuality and enabling immediate knowledge updates.
Yet, constructing a KG from scratch in a new domain is a notoriously arduous task (Zhong et al., 2023;
Ji et al., 2022). The process typically involves cleaning and pre-processing heterogeneous data, multi-step
knowledge acquisition, and post-processing. Ensuring that the resulting KG is reliable and factual is even
more challenging, often requiring extensive manual inspection and crowdsourcing (Wang et al., 2021). In
fields where no ground-truth KG or domain-specific benchmarks exist, this task becomes infeasible without
expert intervention. This makes existing approaches unscalable.
Given these obstacles, we propose characteristics that an effective KG construction method should provide:

     1. Factuality and provenance: Triples grounded in source text with verifiable citations.

     2. Validity: Adherence to ontological schema constraints, appropriate term granularity, and domain-
        correct relations.

     3. Automation: End-to-end extraction without expert oversight; usable by non-specialists.

     4. Scalability: Robust performance as data volume and compute grow.

     5. Domain generality: Principles that transfer across subject areas.

     6. Global integration: Cross-document linking of concepts, not just within local spans.

We refer to KGs that are both factual and valid as reliable; hence, we classify methods that produce factual
and valid triples as reliable.


                                                       2
Recently, KG generation with decoder-based LLMs has become the most widely used and studied method (Xu
et al., 2024), especially for commonsense knowledge extraction (West et al., 2022). Nonetheless, we demon-
strate that LLMs are unable to construct reliable domain-specific KGs. The factuality challenge faced by
LLMs intersects with several other pressing issues, such as hallucinations, outdated knowledge, and lack of
depth in given domains (e.g., in health, law, and finance applications) (Wang et al., 2025a).
Despite their ease of use, versatility, broad knowledge coverage, and impressive general-purpose language
skills (Minaee et al., 2025), LLMs as KG constructors are known to underperform on domain-specific
datasets (Zhu et al., 2024) and are susceptible to domain-irrelevant noise in the context (Chen et al., 2024).
For example, Yang et al. (2025) highlight limitations of LLM-based KG creation in handling domain-specific
medical terms and encoding context-dependent relations beyond generic predicates. Hallucinations fur-
ther restrict text-generative approaches from producing fully accurate and trustworthy domain-specific KGs
without human validation (Ghanem & Cruz, 2025), often resulting in inclusion of fabricated facts in the
KG (Huang et al., 2025a). Since LLMs are oblivious to their training sources (Khalifa et al., 2024), prompt-
based KG distillation from an LLM’s weights does not provide source attribution and obfuscates knowledge
provenance, thus casting doubts on its reliability (Pan et al., 2023a).
Fine-tuned models demonstrate significantly higher accuracy compared to zero-shot and few-shot prompting,
exhibit enhanced extraction fidelity in the domains they are adapted to, and often produce much fewer
hallucinated facts (Ghanem & Cruz, 2025). Without fine-tuning, LLMs are inclined to leak general knowledge
obtained through pretraining, potentially overlooking vital domain-specific information. This calls into
question their usefulness in specialized domains (Yang et al., 2023). In addition, because LLMs are highly
prompt-dependent, their behavior can only be steered through prompting; without fine-tuning, prompted
outputs may not align with task requirements. However, fine-tuning of LLMs requires labeled training
data, negatively impacts generalization in heterogeneous domains, and ultimately reduces adaptability to
knowledge domains that differ from the fine-tuning set (Ghanem & Cruz, 2025).
Finally, KG extraction from text corpora with off-the-shelf LLMs is not global in the sense that the extracted
triples are confined to a single text chunk presented in the context window. Such triples are often local, i.e,
they may only reflect a spurious correlation based on co-occurrence of various terms, as opposed to global
triples obtained from the larger text corpora that can generally be deemed as universal facts. Extending
context length is not a solution to countering this problem because it is known to degrade output quality. In
particular, hallucinations become more frequent in this situation (An et al., 2024), thus affecting the model’s
capability to harness information from lengthy input contexts.
The current approaches fail to meet all six requirements for KGs we listed above (Hofer et al., 2024). A
method that satisfies all six could unlock numerous downstream applications. However, a reliable KG can
be extracted only if the data are of high quality (Rejeleene et al., 2024; Geiger et al., 2020; Wang et al.,
2023). Yet, such data are scarce. This leads us to the central question:

            How can we build a reliable domain-specific KG from limited high-quality sources?

To address this challenge, we propose a novel framework, GraphMERT (Graphical Multidirectional Encoder
Representations from Transformers), for reliable KG extraction from small high-quality domain-specific
data. GraphMERT relies on an encoder-only transformer that distills a symbolic representation from its
weights. It jointly learns cross-modal representations: semantic — from a small expert-curated initial seed
KG, and syntactic — from unstructured sentence-level text by minimizing the standard masked language
modeling (MLM) and the proposed masked node modeling (MNM) losses. We automatically extract a KG
that captures factual knowledge by training GraphMERT on high-quality texts with a small seed KG
(e.g., 100+ triples per relation). The framework is domain-agnostic and only requires a seed KG along
with a small, high-quality, domain-specific dataset (e.g., ∼ 100M tokens). To the best of our knowledge,
GraphMERT-powered KG extraction is the first framework that possesses all six characteristics of an
effective KG mentioned earlier:

     1. Factuality and provenance: We implement triple extraction at the sentence level. One can trace
        back each triple to its source sequence, thus supporting knowledge provenance. FActScore, which


                                                      3
        quantifies the factuality of a KG (more details in Sec. 6.2), for the GraphMERT-generated KG
        (69.8%) is much higher than that of an LLM-generated one (40.2%).

      2. Validity: The resulting KG preserves the relation usage patterns imposed by the ontological structure
         of the seed KG, which enhances the validity of the relations in the extracted KG relative to the LLM-
         extracted baseline KG. ValidityScore, which quantifies the ontological alignment of a KG (more
         details in Sec. 6.2), for our KG (68.8%) is much higher than that of the baseline (43.0%).

      3. Automation: It does not need manual feature selection, rule handcrafting, or human experts in the
         loop. It leverages a neural-to-symobolic converter, i.e., GraphMERT, to automatically and reliably
         generate a KG.

      4. Scalability: We obtain training data only from credible sources and the compact GraphMERT
         (with just 80M parameters) eliminates the need for pretraining on large unverified text, making
         the approach much more practical than employing expensive LLMs (with billions or trillions of
         parameters). It can be scaled when provided with more data and given extra compute resources.

      5. Domain generality: It relies on domain-agnostic principles. We do not hard-code any domain-specific
         parameters to the proposed GraphMERT pipeline.

      6. Global integration: It can connect global concepts across the whole dataset throughout training, in
         contrast to extracting disconnected information from isolated text.

The rest of the article is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we review different KG extraction techniques and
motivate the need for a reliable KG. In Sec. 3, we provide a brief motivational example. In Sec. 4, we give a
detailed overview of our proposed GraphMERT framework and its architecture. In Sec. 5, we describe the
experimental setup. In Sec. 6, we provide experimental results. In Sec. 7, we discuss the limitations of our
methodology and discuss future work. Finally, we conclude in Sec. 8.


2     Background and Related Work

In this section, we review prior research that is relevant to our work, including applications of neurosymbolic
AI and KGs. We then examine existing KG extraction methods, their limitations, and how our framework
addresses these gaps. Finally, we provide the technical background on graph transformer architectures that
is necessary to understand the remainder of this work.

2.1   Knowledge Graphs

The term “Knowledge Graph” was coined by Google in a blog (Singhal, 2012) in 2012. Google anticipated
a great potential of graph representation in web search for discerning semantic connections in vast web data
to respond to user queries. Since then, KGs have sparked a great deal of research on knowledge-aware
applications (Zhang et al., 2024a). A KG G = (V, E) can be viewed as a directed graph where nodes
V represent real-world entities and directed edges E ⊆ V × V represent relationships between them (see
Fig. 1 for a toy example). Each directed edge e = (u, v) ∈ E connects two nodes u, v ∈ V and encodes a
relationship r between the corresponding entities. Semantically, a KG can be thought of as a set of triples
G = ⟨h, r, t⟩ = ⟨head, relation, tail⟩, where head and tail denote two KG entities connected by a directed
relation. For example, in Fig. 1, ⟨Metformin, TREATS, Type 2 Diabetes⟩ (note the implied directionality in
the representation) is one of the triples in the toy KG.

2.2   Importance of KGs in Neurosymbolic AI

Reasoning is the defining challenge in neurosymbolic AI. Researchers have long struggled to combine the
efficiency of neural learning with the rigor and interpretability of symbolic inference (Zhang et al., 2021).


                                                      4
                                            Metformin


                                          ACTIVATES        TREATS


                                                                     Type 2 Diabetes
                                   AMPK


                                     INHIBITS              ASSOCIATED WITH
                                                                     ASSOCIATED WITH

                                             Increased hepatic
                                             Gluconeogenesis
                                                                      Chronic Kidney
                                                                         Disease



                           Figure 1: A toy KG example from the medical domain.




2.2.1   The Representation Dilemma: Neural or Symbolic?


Traditional AI research overwhelmingly associates reasoning with purely symbolic systems, such as expert
systems (van Melle, 1978; Lindsay et al., 1993) or logic-based AI (McCarthy, 1980; Colmerauer & Roussel,
1996). For decades, this paradigm shaped AI practice under the premise that human intelligence could be
reduced to formal logic operating on symbols (Newell & Simon, 1976; Haugeland, 1985). Symbolic methods
offer clarity and structure by explicitly encoding rules over discrete concepts (Newell & Simon, 1976) and
are reliable, given suitable abstractions. The symbolic approach governed the AI field till the 90s, when its
drawbacks became evident: Symbolic systems struggle with ambiguity, contextualization, and the fluidity
of real-world knowledge (Harnad, 1990). In addition, computational complexity limits scalability of systems
that are already prone to brittleness: Complete symbolic grounding of a knowledge base leads to a worst-case
combinatorial explosion (Chen & Suen, 1994).
In contrast, neural approaches rely on multidimensional embeddings as their representations and approximate
knowledge grounding through gradient-based learning over a continuous parameter space (LeCun et al.,
2015). They are robust against outliers and inaccuracies in data, and scale learning and inference well (Hitzler
et al., 2022). Modern deep learning (DL) excels in domains such as image classification (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012) and machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2016). Neural systems are efficient learners but forfeit
transparency: Their decision pathways remain opaque and lack the verifiable interpretability of symbolic
inference (Tran et al., 2025). They tend to memorize, thus undermining reliable generalization beyond
observed facts, especially in out-of-distribution domains. Furthermore, while probabilistic and approximate
inference accommodates ambiguities, it yields imprecise logical inference.
A fundamental trade-off is apparent: Symbolic reasoning offers precision and interpretability but lacks
scalability, while neural reasoning is scalable and flexible but lacks transparency. The central question
remains: Which representation best fits a given task? Tasks that involve complex, high-volume, and noisy
data, particularly those centered on pattern recognition, primarily favor neural DL systems. In contrast,
symbolic forms are best suited to problems that require human interpretability or necessitate verifiable
reasoning, e.g., in critical decision-making domains (Rudin, 2019). Tasks that require explainability or
involve abstract symbolic data structures (Wolfram Research Inc.) naturally favor symbolic systems, which
are inherently self-explanatory (Hitzler et al., 2022). For instance, graph-based symbolic reasoning reduces
many queries to reachability checks, yielding verifiable answers. Due to these complementary advantages
and limitations, researchers are increasingly focused on neurosymbolic integration (Tran et al., 2025) for
complex AI challenges that cannot be solved by either approach individually.


                                                           5
2.2.2   KG with Neural Network: Unifying the Representations

In many tasks, the solution is not to pit symbolic and neural approaches against each other but to combine
them in hybrid, modular systems. Neural networks discover statistical patterns through gradient descent;
symbolic layers then manipulate extracted structure efficiently (Garcez & Lamb, 2023). This integration en-
ables knowledge extraction from neural models. Within such a neurosymbolic framework, KGs can naturally
serve as symbolic memory and rule repositories. Coupled with neural networks, they provide modularity and
cross-representation translation. KGs may handle tasks better suited to symbolic representation, mitigating
the weaknesses of implicit neural reasoning. Moreover, when a KG is distilled directly from a neural network
itself, it provides a transparent view of the learned representations of the model, fostering trust and enabling
cross-domain transfer. By decoupling learning (implicit, neural) from reasoning (explicit, symbolic), KGs
address interpretability, verifiability, and factuality gaps in modern AI systems that are dominated by neural
approaches (Besold et al., 2017).

2.2.3   KG Applications in Neurosymbolic Frameworks

KGs with high-quality expert knowledge enable a range of downstream applications.

Explicit reasoning and knowledge transfer: Symbolic inference over KGs is efficient and inter-
pretable (Cheng et al., 2024). For instance, retrieving all drugs (d) that (1) target a protein (p) associated
with Type 2 Diabetes and (2) are approved by the FDA, expressed as the conjunctive query:
          ∃ p, d associated_with(p, Type_2_Diabetes) ∧ targets(d, p) ∧ approved_by(d, FDA)                 (1)
                                                                                                    

Explicit rules can also be transferred across related domains. Neural reasoning complements this by lever-
aging KG embeddings to exploit graph structure while ignoring explicit constraints, enabling it to handle
ambiguity and subtle semantic variations (Zhang et al., 2021).

Reliability in critical fields: In sensitive domains, auditable and editable KGs can serve as a persistent
knowledge base: Facts can be inspected, verified, and updated directly (Pan et al., 2023a). LLMs, by contrast,
embed knowledge implicitly in parameters, making tracing and verification difficult (Akyurek et al., 2022),
and are prone to hallucinations (Huang et al., 2025b). Updating LLMs is resource-intensive, requiring fine-
tuning or retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), and resolving contradictions demands complex methods
such as context-aware decoding. Verification of generated content against a factual KG minimizes the
risk of inaccuracies or hallucinations (Luo et al., 2024; Hron et al., 2024). Furthermore, a KG offers the
“ability to forget”: Information can be erased if required by legal regulations or upon user request. By
contrast, removing knowledge from LLM requires complex interventions and sophisticated strategies that
risk catastrophic unlearning (Si et al., 2023), raising concerns about access to harmful content, user privacy,
and copyright violations (Tian et al., 2024).

RAG factuality and scalability: To enhance factuality, RAG can be replaced with GraphRAG (Edge
et al., 2024). In standard RAG, answer accuracy depends heavily on the relevance and quality of retrieved
text. This often fails when information is buried in long passages or scattered across documents. Further,
vector-based RAG depends on textual embeddings that may fail to correlate semantically similar concepts
dispersed in spatiotemporally disparate sources. KGs provide an anchoring structure for LLMs to maintain
context, and make evidence clear, verifiable, and lightweight for efficient retrieval. This improves scalability
and lowers generation costs. Recent work by Rao et al. (2024) shows GraphRAG outperforming vector
RAG and HybridRAG (Sarmah et al., 2024) on arXiv datasets, demonstrating superior factual accuracy and
reasoning. These results highlight GraphRAG’s potential, especially for tasks requiring multi-hop reasoning
and sustained context understanding.

Reinforcement learning: KGs are effective for policy-guided walks in reinforcement learning with logical
rules (Uddin et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2021), as they encode explicit relations and allow rule-based constraints
on transitions. This structured setting maintains logical consistency and supports optimal path learning.
By contrast, using unstructured text as the environment leads to noisy and inconsistent transitions, making
rule-aware exploration more challenging.


                                                       6
Interpretability of neural network decisions: Extracting a KG from a model, which externalizes
neural associations into explicit, structured relations, unveils acquired knowledge (Swamy et al., 2021). It
maps hidden representations onto human-understandable concepts, enabling tracing of predictions, post-
hoc explanation, and auditing. Unlike raw embeddings or hidden activations, which remain opaque, KGs
provide a symbolic layer for inspecting reasoning chains, thus bridging neural representations with semantic
knowledge.

Discoveries: KGs uncover hidden insights by linking concepts, which appear unconnected, through explicit
graph paths. This connectivity underpins applications such as recommendations, where relevant entities are
suggested based on graph neighborhoods, and analogical discovery, where cross-domain parallels emerge
through reasoning over paths. Unlike unstructured text or embeddings, KGs provide verifiable relations,
enabling trustworthy discoveries. In biomedicine, for example, a path like drug → protein target → pathway
→ disease can reveal repurposing opportunities, such as a hypertension drug acting on pathways implicated
in diabetes.

2.3     KGs for Domain-specific Superintelligence

In the near future, a natural scarcity of high-quality text sources may impede the scalability of ever-larger
LLMs, necessitating a paradigm shift that favors smaller language models with domain-specific expertise.
This would shift focus from general-purpose artificial general intelligence to domain-specific superintelligence:
from breadth to depth.
Superintelligence (Bostrom, 2014), an entity whose intelligence surpasses human capability and may diverge
from anthropomorphic reasoning, could excel in task-specific reasoning, generate disruptive insights, and
exceed human-level creativity (Szocik et al., 2020). A recent study by Dedhia et al. (2025) illustrates
one path toward this goal by translating multi-hop KG paths to composite natural language statements,
effectively linking knowledge depth to KG path length. They demonstrate how to boost reasoning ability
in a chosen domain using a high-quality domain-specific KG: fine-tuning a small language model based on
deep, multi-hop KG knowledge. The longer the paths used for fine-tuning, the better their reasoning — a
key property for domain-specific superintelligence. Seen from this perspective, conventional text datasets
resemble one-hop knowledge: They only touch the surface and thus produce models that elicit surface-level
understanding. In this context, a high-quality, domain-specific KG that explicitly encodes the wealth of
knowledge through concise and unambiguous semantic relationships serves as a powerful tool for unlocking
deeper intelligence. Such a structured knowledge simplifies learning of meaningful semantic representations,
particularly where models would otherwise be overwhelmed with the syntactic complexity of lengthy yet less
informative sentences. This indicates that a scalable method for automatic extraction of high-quality KGs
would open up a path to scalable superintelligence.

2.4     Existing KG-extraction Methods

Next, we briefly review existing KG-extraction methods. For further details, we direct the reader to a
comprehensive review on KG construction (Zhong et al., 2023). We discuss the following categories: (1)
task-specific natural language processing (NLP) methods, (2) triple embedding-based, and, the most recent,
(3) generative, or LLM-based, which we discuss in greater detail, given its current prominence.
Given the growing attention to LLM-driven KG construction (Zhu et al., 2024), we further differentiate KG
extraction from KG generation, to clarify their respective advantages, limitations, and application scopes.
We classify methods where an LLM plays a pivotal role in the KG construction pipeline, either generating
triples conditioned on input texts or distilling knowledge from model weights, under the category of KG
generation. We refer to all other approaches as KG extraction.

2.4.1    Task-specific NLP Methods Scale Badly

Early rule-based information extraction systems demanded heavy feature engineering and domain expertise.
Modern pipelines sequentially chain machine learning components—named entity recognition, coreference


                                                       7
resolution, and relation extraction (Jaradeh et al., 2023)—often relying on structured or semi-structured
data (Hofer et al., 2024). These systems require sophisticated text preprocessing heuristics (Rao et al.,
2024), e.g., as in the case of conditional random fields. Long short-term memories and convolutional neural
networks introduce locality bias. Another drawback is that errors propagate over the pipeline. Overall, these
methods can be accurate, but are very labor-intensive, not fully automatic, and hard to scale.

2.4.2   Triple Embeddings are Local, Closed-domain, and Miss Long-range Dependencies

An embedding-based approach seeks to train ML methods on KGs to capture semantic and structural
patterns of the graph into embeddings by optimizing a scoring function. Embeddings enable the model
to predict missing links (triple completion) and estimate the likelihood of new relations (link prediction;
Cheng et al. 2024). However, this approach suffers from several limitations, including selection bias, lack
of scalability, brittleness to KG errors, and limited external/world knowledge (Xia et al., 2025). Because
most KG embedding models operate on local triple patterns, they struggle to compose long multi-hop
chains, handle negation, or respect ontological constraints — particularly when relations are n-ary, qualified
(e.g., temporal, provenance), or context-dependent. They also assume a largely closed-world, static graph:
Cold-start entities/relations and evolving KGs typically require expensive retraining or ad-hoc heuristics,
and performance degrades under distribution shift. More concretely, embedding-based approaches face the
following limitations.

Sparsity, limited information, and vocabulary: The scale of the largest publicly available KGs, e.g.,
Wikidata (118M+ entities), PubGraph (385M+ entities; Ahrabian et al. 2023), is of the order of 108 entities.
The scale is incompatible with text corpora sizes: In 2024, top-tier LLMs reported up to 1013 -token training
datasets (Villalobos et al., 2024), and the pretraining corpora of leading projects can collectively surpass
700TB (Liu et al., 2024b).

Insufficient utilization of semantic information: Learning an embedding representation that incorpo-
rates equally good graph structural and semantic information remains challenging. This is an active research
frontier itself. Multiple efforts are targeted at developing architectures and approaches that produce em-
beddings that are not overly localized (Rao & Wang, 2023), incorporate multiple relation types (Lu et al.,
2023), and better integrate contextual (including semantic) information for improved reasoning (Shi et al.,
2025). This suggests that embedding methods are useful in task-specific applications based on KGs, but on
their own, fall short in extending KGs.

Generalizability: Embedding methods do not generalize well across different KGs. Each KG is charac-
terized by its own set of relations, attributes, and ontology, making it impossible or impractical to unite
many KGs for training. In practice, embeddings entangle schema-specific signals (relation vocabularies, type
hierarchies, qualifier formats). Hence, representations learned on one KG transfer poorly to another with
different ontologies or naming conventions. Cross-KG use then requires costly alignment steps — entity
linking, relation mapping, and negative-sampling redesign — and even after alignment, out-of-vocabulary
entities/relations and schema drift often degrade performance (Chen et al., 2023b).

2.4.3   LLM-based KG Generation is Not Reliable

With the tremendous success of LLMs on all kinds of NLP tasks, modern research on KG extraction is
skewed towards extracting relational knowledge from LLM weights using prompts (Zhu et al., 2024; Carta
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2025; Gupta et al., 2025). The widespread adoption of LLMs can be attributed
to their versatility across tasks, adaptability to diverse domains, and ease of use, which together make
them attractive as general-purpose AI systems. LLMs capture relational knowledge unevenly: They are
more accurate for some types (e.g., commonsense or hierarchical ‘is-a’ links) and less accurate for others
(e.g., detailed encyclopedic facts or multi-hop traversal relations; Pan et al. 2023a). In addition, a range of
inherent drawbacks raises concerns about the use of LLMs for reliable domain-specific KG generation. The
drawbacks we discuss next appear to be intrinsic to generative methods of KG construction.


                                                      8
LLMs are brittle with respect to prompts: Instruction fine-tuning does not fully address this prob-
lem (Zhou et al., 2024). KG extraction with prompts is biased towards prompt structure (Cao et al., 2021).
LLMs are sensitive to task-framing: answer consistency can shift with small syntactic changes (Hagström
et al., 2023), with slight prompt variations (Mousavi et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a), and even with respect
to basic logical constraints (Ghosh et al., 2025). Retrieval augmentation can mitigate inconsistency and
knowledge-cutoff issues (Shuster et al., 2021), but introduces new failure modes: conflicts between retrieved
evidence and LLM’s parametric knowledge (Zhang et al., 2025; Zeng et al., 2025), imperfections in retrieval
and ranking (Jin et al., 2024), and weak relevance estimation, resulting in incorrect utilization of the retrieved
knowledge (Wang et al., 2024e).

LLMs hallucinate: Beyond reproducibility, LLMs hallucinate outputs that are nonsensical or unfaithful
to the provided source content (Ji et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024b; Li et al., 2024). Hallucinations persist
regardless of model size or training data scale (Shuster et al., 2021). The current consensus is that hallucina-
tions are an inherent, unavoidable property of LLMs. Some scholars formally show that, from the theoretical
viewpoint, hallucinations may be innate to probabilistic generative methods (Xu et al., 2025). All methods
to strengthen LLM reasoning, such as chain-of-thoughts with self-consistency, fine-tuning, augmented gen-
eration, and greedy decoding, improve accuracy, but are unable to eliminate nontrivial hallucinations (Kim
et al., 2025). In the context of KG generation, LLMs struggle with inverse inference (the “reversal curse”):
They may learn ⟨A, is-a, B⟩ yet fail to infer the inverse relation (Berglund et al., 2024), undermining triple
extraction in domains where inverse relations are common and semantically critical.

LLMs are not factually accurate: Factuality and hallucination are distinct: Factuality errors occur
when a model fails to learn or apply factual knowledge accurately, whereas hallucinations are ungrounded or
unfaithful content relative to the provided source (Wang et al., 2024f). As demonstrated in our motivating
example (Sec. 3), even state-of-the-art models can return factually divergent answers to equivalent queries.
Because models acquire factual knowledge during pretraining and can add more via continued pretrain-
ing (Chang et al., 2025), rigorous dataset cleaning is essential. Yet, verifying or synthesizing high-quality data
at the LLM scale is infeasible in practice, creating a fundamental size-quality trade-off (see Sec. 2.5). No cur-
rent LLM offers the factuality needed for trust. Even the most advanced commercial systems make significant
factual errors, which spike on rare entities and remain less factual than humans (Min et al., 2023), with mis-
takes persisting even in search-augmented tools (Mehrotra & Marchman, 2024). Consequently, any method
that relies on LLMs needs robust verification. In high-stakes domains (e.g., medicine (Thirunavukarasu
et al., 2023), autonomous driving, aeronautics, and cybersecurity), verification alone is insufficient: Outputs
must also be interpretable and explainable for decision-makers. However, today’s LLMs provide little insight
into their decision rationale (Madsen et al., 2024; Ye & Durrett, 2022; Bowman, 2023), falling short of the
guarantees these applications demand.


2.5   Impact of Data Quality and Dataset Size

Prior work shows that state-of-the-art LLM capabilities emerge only when model size, dataset scale, and
compute reach sufficient magnitude (Brown et al., 2020; Kaplan et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2022). As a result,
modern pretraining corpora often favor scale over domain fidelity. Given LLM propensity to memorization,
flawed data sources with misinformation and biases are a primary driver of hallucinations (Huang et al.,
2025b). Domain adaptation with fine-tuning (Hu et al., 2022) can improve factuality and coherence, but risk
catastrophic forgetting and cross-domain interference (Wang et al., 2024d); continued pretraining adapts
knowledge more smoothly to a target domain, but demands substantial additional data. In medicine, re-
searchers warn that scarcity of diverse, high-quality data at the scale required by LLMs leads to a “garbage
in, garbage out” dynamic and remains a key barrier to clinical LLM deployment (Thirunavukarasu et al.,
2023). Compounding this, large-scale public text corpora lack established cross-verification mechanisms.
Privacy and copyright concerns restrict access to private datasets for training purposes (Pereira et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2024b). In cases where models are trained on closed-source training data that are not accessible
for scrutiny, the lack of transparency blocks the public’s ability to conduct a thorough investigation (Nguyen
et al., 2024).


                                                        9
As a response to the limited availability of verified sources (Gandhi et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024c) and
unaffordable training costs, a growing line of work seeks to maximize LLM performance with less data,
emphasizing the quality-quantity trade-off. The NLP field’s post-GPT-3 trajectory (Brown et al., 2020), pri-
oritized ever-larger unlabeled web corpora, arguably underweighting data quality. Recent efforts formalize
data-quality criteria (Zheng et al., 2025) and show that small, high-quality datasets can outperform substan-
tially larger but unvalidated corpora (Iskander et al., 2024); likewise, compact models trained on carefully
curated, domain-specific text sometimes surpass frontier general-purpose models on in-domain tasks (Kadosh
et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2023a).
Our approach also advocates for “data quality first”: We contend that high-quality data — not the sheer
volume of data — is crucial to creating a reliable KG.

2.6     GraphRAG

Retrieval-augmented generation: RAG enhances the capabilities of LLMs by connecting them to ex-
ternal data sources. In a typical RAG system, a user’s query is used to retrieve relevant documents or
text chunks from a large corpus. This retrieved information is then combined with the original query into
a prompt for the LLM, which generates a response grounded in the provided context (Ram et al., 2023).
This approach is particularly effective when the knowledge base is too large to fit within the LLM context
window. The most common retrieval method, vector RAG, involves embedding the text corpus into a vector
space and retrieving chunks that are semantically closest to the query vector (Gao et al., 2024). However,
this approach struggles with queries that require a holistic understanding of the entire dataset.

GraphRAG: To strengthen standard retrieval, many systems incorporate KGs. GraphRAG (Edge et al.,
2024) leverages the inherent modularity of KGs to support global sense-making in two stages: indexing and
querying. In the indexing stage, an LLM builds an entity-level KG from source documents, then partitions
the graph into a hierarchy of nested communities based on the density of connections between entities. The
LLM then produces bottom-up summaries for each community, yielding a hierarchical summary tree that
aggregates local insights into global ones. In the querying stage, GraphRAG extracts a subgraph based on the
pre-generated community summaries and the query, and uses that subgraph as context to generate answers.
With its hierarchical design, GraphRAG reports improvements over conventional vector-based RAG (Edge
et al., 2024).

Using GraphRAG for KG evaluation: The global sense-making capability of GraphRAG also enables a
unique method for evaluating the quality of the KG and benchmarking it across various tasks. The accuracy
of the answers to user queries is directly dependent on the coverage, validity, and factuality of the KG. A
poorly constructed KG (e.g., one with incomplete entities or incorrect relationships) results in fragmented,
inaccurate, or nonsensical responses. Therefore, by assessing the quality of GraphRAG’s output to queries,
one can indirectly measure the quality of the KG itself.

2.7     Graph Attention Networks

The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) has established itself as the de facto standard for NLP
tasks. Self-attention lets a transformer model long-range dependencies in parallel, dramatically speeding
up training compared to their predecessors. Their stackable blocks enable scaling to billions of parameters.
Due to their scalability and unprecedented versatility on language tasks, transformers currently dominate
the NLP field. Yet, the native transformer self-attention module handles only sequential input.

2.7.1    Graph Transformer Architecture

To enable training of a transformer on graphical input, the graph structure must either be encoded into the
input or the attention module must be modified. We do both: (1) encode relation embedding into input
graph sequences (see Sec. 2.7.2) and (2) modify attention weights to reflect spatial distance in input graphs
(see Sec. 4.2). To implement our model, we take inspiration from Graphormer (Ying et al., 2021) but design
alternative graph encodings tailored to language tasks as well.


                                                     10
2.7.2   Hierarchical Graph Attention Networks

To incorporate semantic relations into GraphMERT, we combine a generic transformer architecture with
a hierarchical graph attention network (H-GAT; Xu et al. 2021; Nathani et al. 2019). H-GAT fuses relation
embeddings into semantic graph nodes before passing the graph sequences to the transformer layers. The
original H-GAT architecture hierarchically combines intra-relation and inter-relation attention to derive
node embeddings by aggregating the embeddings of the neighbors of the graph node. To tailor H-GAT to
our input (i.e., chain vocabulary graphs that we describe later), we discard the unnecessary inter-relation
representations and use the simplified architecture with token embeddings instead of graph node embeddings.
In the GraphMERT implementation, given a triple < h, r, t > — head, relation, tail, where head and tail
are represented by {h1 , .., hm } and {t1 , .., tn } at the token level, for any given tail token ti we have:
                                                                   
                                  (r)
                                 eij    = LeakyReLU a⊤
                                                     r Wr ti ∥ Wr hj    .                                 (2)

where Wr is a learnable relation embedding matrix, ar is a learnable relation embedding, and LeakyReLU
is an activation function.

                                                                           (r) 
                                 (r)                  (r)            exp eij
                                αij     =   softmaxj eij       = Pm           (r) 
                                                                                      .                   (3)
                                                                     k=1 exp eik

Then the final node embedding for the tail token is given by:

                                                       m
                                                              (r)
                                                       X
                                               t′i =         αij Wr hj .                                  (4)
                                                       j=1


Thus, the new tail token t′i fuses the relation embedding via Wr and ar with its initial tail token embedding
ti and all head token embeddings {h1 , ..., hm }.

3   Motivational Example

What follows is a motivating example to demonstrate the importance of reliability in our proposed pipeline.
To do this, we design a simple “reverse test” using Unified Medical Language System (UMLS; Boden-
reider 2004) triples. First, we sample a ground-truth triple from UMLS: ⟨chronic kidney disease,
has_finding_site, kidney structure⟩ [SNOMED CT United States Edition vocabulary in UMLS lists
kidney structure as the only finding site for chronic kidney disease (CKD)]. Next, we manually create a
sequence that implies a weak connection between CKD and cerebellar gray matter abnormalities (so that
it is appropriate for the associated_with relation, i.e., ⟨chronic kidney disease, associated_with,
cerebellar gray matter⟩ would be an ontologically appropriate triple). We craft this sequence so that
it reflects recent medical studies on brain imaging in patients with CKD (Xiao et al., 2024), which show
indirect abnormalities in the cerebellar gray matter. Even with this indirect correlation, the logical triple
should remain ⟨chronic kidney disease, has_finding_site, kidney structure⟩, as found in UMLS.
Next, we prompt strong general-purpose LLMs (Gemini 2.5 Pro, Claude Sonnet 4.5, GPT-5, and Grok
4) to infer the triple from the sentence. Despite fluent rationales, these models frequently hallucinate
relations or return ontologically invalid outputs, yielding triples that are non-factual or misaligned with
UMLS constraints. Their outputs seem to show spurious correlations instead of semantic connections. In
contrast, our GraphMERT model, trained as detailed in the following sections, recovers the correct UMLS
triple from the same sentence. This example underscores that adhering to biomedical ontologies matters:
Terms like “gray matter” should be used with an associated_with relation rather than being miscast with
finding_site; structure-aware training is essential for preventing such errors. This is only possible with
the proposed GraphMERT pipeline.


                                                         11
 Prompt. Please complete the following medical KG triple (head, relation, tail):
 (chronic kidney disease, has_finding_site, ...)

 based on the sequence:
 Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a renal disorder. However, neuroimaging cohorts of people with CKD
 have reported subtle, group-level abnormalities within the cerebellar gray matter. Studies note modest
 reductions or regional alterations in cerebellar gray-matter volume, cortical thickness, and diffusion met-
 rics. These observations are heterogeneous and not diagnostic, yet they place observable findings at the
 cerebellar gray matter in CKD. Thus, CKD may be associated with cerebellar gray-matter changes.

Different LLMs produced mostly wrong answers to this triple-generation query:

 Gemini 2.5 Pro: (chronic kidney disease, has_finding_site, cerebellar gray matter)

 The provided text explicitly states that neuroimaging studies “place observable findings at the cerebellar gray
 matter in CKD.”


 Claude Sonnet 4.5: Based on the provided sequence, the medical KG triple should be completed as:
 (pediatric chronic kidney disease (pckd), has_finding_site, kidney)

 Reasoning:
 The primary and defining finding site for chronic kidney disease is the kidney itself, as explicitly stated in
 the passage: “Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a renal disorder.” While the passage does discuss secondary
 neuroimaging findings in the cerebellar gray matter, these are described as:
       • Subtle and group-level abnormalities
       • Heterogeneous observations
       • Not diagnostic
       • Modest and regional alterations
 In contrast, the kidney is the primary pathological site where CKD occurs by definition. The cerebellar changes
 represent associated findings or potential complications, but they are not the primary finding site of the disease
 entity itself. For medical knowledge graphs, the has_finding_site relation typically indicates the primary anatom-
 ical location where the disease process occurs, which for CKD is definitively the kidney. If you needed to represent
 the cerebellar findings, that would be better captured with a different relation such as has_associated_finding or
 may_affect, rather than has_finding_site.


 GPT-5: Based on the medical knowledge graph triple format and the provided sequence, the completed triple
 would be: (chronic kidney disease, has_finding_site, cerebellar gray matter)

 This is based on the text where chronic kidney disease (CKD) is associated with observable findings in the
 cerebellar gray matter, specifically mentioning reductions in cerebellar gray-matter volume, cortical thickness,
 and diffusion metrics.


 Grok 4: Based on the medical knowledge graph triple format and the provided sequence, the completed triple
 would be: (chronic kidney disease, has_finding_site, cerebellar gray matter)

 The triple (chronic kidney disease, has_finding_site, cerebellar gray matter) is completed based on the provided
 sequence, which states that neuroimaging studies of chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients have identified subtle
 abnormalities in the cerebellar gray matter, such as reductions in volume, cortical thickness, and diffusion metrics.
 The relation “has_finding_site” indicates the anatomical location where these abnormalities are observed, making
 “cerebellar gray matter” the appropriate tail entity.



                                                          12
Next, based on the top 20 predicted tokens from our model with top-5 softmax probabilities of 0.789, 0.173,
0.01, 0.003, 0.003, our pipeline yields “kidneys” (with Gemini 2.5 Pro as a helper LLM), which corresponds
to the UMLS gold answer:

    GraphMERT:
    structure, kidney, system, function, renal, disease, heart, kidneys, of, physiology, arterial, underlying, pancreas,
    organ, impaired, health, cerebrovascular, pathophysiology, injury, morphology

    Gemini 2.5 Pro reasons over GraphMERT triple candidates:
    1. Analyze the Input:
    Sequence: The text describes Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) as a “renal disorder,” indicating its primary location
    is the kidneys. It also explicitly mentions that in people with CKD, neuroimaging has found “abnormalities
    within the cerebellar gray matter.”
    ...
    2. Generate Potential Tails:
    The most obvious and primary finding site for a “renal disorder” is the kidneys.
    The token list contains kidneys. This is a very strong candidate.

    I can also form renal system from the tokens renal and system. This is also correct but is more general than
    kidneys. Specificity is preferred.

    3. Verify and Filter Tails:
    Candidate 1: kidneys
          • Factual: Yes, CKD is a disease of the kidneys.
          • Supported by sequence: Yes, the text calls CKD a “renal disorder.”
          • Valuable & Specific: Yes, it pinpoints the primary organ affected. It is specific and not vague.
          • Uses only candidate tokens: Yes, “kidneys” is in the list.
          • Conclusion: This is a high-quality, factual tail.
    ...
    The text also mentions findings in the “cerebellar gray matter.”  I    can    look   for   tokens    to   con-
    struct this.       Cerebrovascular is available, and structure is available.             I could potentially
    form cerebrovascular structure.          However, the cerebellum is not primarily a vascular struc-
    ture, and this tail is very general and not as precise as the information in the text (“cerebel-
    lar gray matter”).          More importantly, the key tokens cerebellar and gray matter are missing. Therefore,
    I cannot accurately represent this secondary finding site.
    ...
    4. Final Decision: The best and most directly supported tail I can construct from the given tokens is
    kidneys. While the text mentions other sites, the provided tokens do not allow for their accurate
    creation.

As we noted above, there is an indirect correlation between CKD and cerebellar gray matter in the source
sentence; however, it does not imply the triple suggested by most of the LLMs in their responses. This
illustrative case reinforces recent evidence that LLMs regrettably answer based on word correlations in
language rather than honing in on the semantic meaning of text and vernacular syntax, making them
surprisingly brittle (Li et al., 2020). Recent works also show that, despite the high accuracy on various
language tasks, when examined more closely, LLMs are only learning surface-level information, such as word
overlap, perplexity, sentence lengths, etc., and not the underlying task at hand (Durmus et al., 2022). Taken
together, the example above and the additional results we present later make us skeptical about deploying
these models in high-stakes use cases for constructing reliable, domain-specific KGs.

4      GraphMERT KG-extraction Framework

This section introduces the KG extraction pipeline and the GraphMERT architecture. It also introduces
an LLM-based KG generation method that is used to obtain the baseline KG.


                                                            13
      I(a)                Seed KG                        I(c)                   II(a)                     III
                           (triples)                                                       GraphMERT
                                                                                                                Helper
                                                         PAD    PAD              Train                           LLM

       Semantic source                                                                                                   Final triples
      I(b)                                                                                                               Similarity filter &
                                                                                II(b)        Trained                     Drop duplicates
                                       PAD   PAD   PAD
                                                          PAD            PAD
                      Sentences                                                            GraphMERT
                                                          Chain Graphs
                                                                                 Predict
                                                         Syntactic + Semantic
       Syntactic source
                                       PAD   PAD   PAD                                                                    Extracted
                                                                                                                             KG
                                                                                            Raw triples


Figure 2: Overview of the GraphMERT framework. It is trained on the fusion of syntactic and semantic
examples (II) and augments syntactic data with semantic tails (I); an LLM helps determine the linguistic
structure of tails proposed by GraphMERT (III). (I): Chain graph (Ic) combines syntactic knowledge from
text corpora (Ib) with semantic examples and relations from a seed KG (Ia): Roots hold syntactic knowledge
(in orange), sparse leaves hold semantic examples (in blue), and edges encode semantic relations (purple
arrows). (II): GraphMERT is trained on chain graphs to align semantic examples with their syntactic
context (IIa). It then predicts novel semantic token completions for chain graphs without injections, using
their syntactic information as context (IIb). (III): An LLM combines raw semantic token completions from
GraphMERT into grammatically well-formed triple tails, producing complete triples. After filtering them
by similarity to the source syntactic context and dropping duplicate triples, we obtain the final KG.


One of the earliest studies on relational factual knowledge extraction from pre-trained encoder-only models
used cloze-style prompts, as discussed by Petroni et al. (2019). E.g., “John Lennon plays [MASK]” to
complete ⟨John Lennon, PersonInstrument, ?⟩. Later work showed that such a prompt-based retrieval is
heavily biased toward prompt syntax rather than factual content (Cao et al., 2021). For instance, García-
Silva et al. (2023) report that BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) completes the above example with “guitar, piano,
drums, himself, harmonica,” where syntactically plausible but non-factual predictions like “drums” rank
high and, surprisingly, more specific prompts, such as “John Lennon plays instrument [MASK],” produce
irrelevant outputs like “here, there, too, himself, onstage.”
These shortcomings stem from the syntactic form of the prompt overshadowing the factual knowledge of the
model, which is mostly semantic. Our key innovation overcomes this obstacle by implanting relations into an
encoder via graph attention and training relation embeddings in a dedicated semantic space under the unified
MLM + MNM objectives. Our approach directly teaches the model relational knowledge abstracted away
from prompt syntax. In parallel, GraphMERT learns the syntactic structure too and leverages syntactic
information as a context for semantic knowledge.
A high-level overview of the pipeline is shown in Fig. 2. GraphMERT is a multi-directional encoder-
only transformer. To complete a triple, it predicts a masked tail (a node in the KG, hence MNM). Just
like typically text-based encoder-only models, GraphMERT also learns syntactic representations from text
corpora via the MLM learning objective (Devlin et al., 2019). To enable an encoder-only extraction, we
create a new textual data format that encapsulates semantic triples and engineer GraphMERT to work in
this space.

4.1    Syntactic and Semantic Spaces: Merging Semantic Triples and Syntactic Text into a Unified
       Graphical Format

In essence, GraphMERT performs syntactic-to-semantic knowledge conversion during prediction. The
sentences in the dataset represent the syntactic space. The KG triples represent the semantic space that


                                                                    14
                          (A) PAD                   (B) PAD       PAD
                                      PAD   PAD
                                                                         t


                                                                         h


                                PAD   PAD   PAD          PAD      PAD   PAD


                          (C)
                                PAD   PAD   PAD    l1        l2   PAD   PAD   PAD   PAD




                                                             h1               h2




Figure 3: Chain graph. Roots are in orange, leaves are in blue. Conceptual representation (A, B): term
level, each circle is a term. Actual representation in training (C): token level, each square is a token. Each
term can be multi-token. (A) No injections, all leaves are empty. (B) One root node has a leaf term. (C)
Token-level representation for the 3-leaf case. Here, the leaf in (B) is encoded with a maximum of three
tokens and padded to the maximum length if needed. Root term comprises two tokens, and tail term also
comprises two tokens that are connected to the first root token.


includes semantic relations. To enable knowledge form conversion, we propose leafy chain graph encoding
that unifies the semantic and syntactic representations into a joint representation (see Fig. 3) in which chain
graph roots lie in the syntactic space and leaves, along with their relations, lie in the semantic space. As we
demonstrate later, leaves play a crucial role in training semantic relation embeddings.
Leafy chain graphs follow a regular structure, which enables sequential encoding of the graphical information.
All chain graphs have a fixed number of root nodes; the number of leaves per root node is also fixed. Leaves
of the same root are connected, introducing a shortest-path linkage between them. All edges are undirected
(the directionality of relations is implied in the architecture).
To create a unified representation for the training data, we parse the dataset into chain graphs with <pad>
tokens in all leaf positions, keeping only root nodes non-empty. Next, we populate the empty leaves with
semantic nodes and their relations from the seed KG in a separate pipeline step, as detailed in Sec. 4.3.
Thereafter, the dataset consists of leafy chain graphs with a regular structure. Most leaf nodes are pads,
while some contain semantic tail tokens from the seed KG. This regularity in graphical input informs and
simplifies the choice of graph encodings in GraphMERT, as discussed further in Sec. 4.2.1.


4.2     GraphMERT Architecture and Training

The core architectural challenge in graph transformer design lies in encoding graphs into a sequential input
for attention-based learning, in order to enable robust graphical representations. We discuss this in the next
two subsections.

4.2.1    GraphMERT Architecture with Graph Encodings

The proposed GraphMERT F(x, θ), x: chain graph input, θ: trainable parameters, is a RoBERTa-style (Liu
et al., 2019) encoder-only transformer integrated with H-GAT, trained with the MLM + MNM objective.
Fig. 4 illustrates the GraphMERT architecture. Our choice of graph encodings is informed by the regularity
of the input graph: The input consists of chain graphs with a fixed number of root and leaf nodes. Therefore,
to describe the input graph class, node encoding, semantic leaf relation encodings, and spatial distances
between node pairs are sufficient. Though common in graph transformers, degree and sparsity encodings
offer little value in our setup. The two core components of GraphMERT that encapsulate graph encoding
are the input embedding layer and the attention decay mask.


                                                        15
                                                                 GraphMERT
                                  I. Embedding Layer                                   II. Transformer Layers
    (A) No H-GAT (no leaves)


             Node Feature            =         Syntactic token                                     MatMul


                                          send to transformer layers
                                                                                        Softmax
    (B) With H-GAT on leaves

                                                                                                                 Decay Mask
         Fused Node Feature t'i      = H-GAT(ti, ar, Wr, hj), j = 1...m                                           f(sp(i, j))


                                                                                           Scale
           Semantic token ti


                                                                                           MatMul

              Relation ar                   Relation embedding                         Q            K        V
                                                 matrix Wr

                                                                                        Fused Node Feature

                                                                                                OR
             Syntactic token hm
                                                                                            Node Feature
             All head tokens




Figure 4: Main GraphMERT architectural components. GraphMERT is a RoBERTa transformer with
two modifications. (I) In the embedding layer, H-GAT encodes semantic triples. (IA) There are leaves
connected to a root node; hence, the node feature is equal to the token embedding. (IB) There are leaves
connected to a root node; H-GAT fuses leaves, relations, and head embeddings resulting in fused node feature.
(II) In the attention layers, attention weights are multiplied by a function that exponentially decreases with
pairwise distance. They encode graph relations and graph distance, respectively. The input is either a node
feature or a fused node feature.


The embedding layer processes input nodes, concretely, root nodes along with their leaves, and semantic
relations for each injected leaf node. For every injected triple, its head (multi-token) lies in the root space
and its tail (also multi-token) lies in the leaf space. The embedding block fuses every leaf token embedding
with its relation and all its head tokens via H-GAT (see Sec. 2.7.2):

                                           t′i = ti + H-GAT(ti , r, {h1 , .., hm }),                                            (5)
                                           dim(t′i ) = dim(ti ),

where ti is the tail token embedding, hj is the head token embedding, and dim is the embedding dimension.
The derived embedding replaces the initial leaf embedding, effectively encoding the whole semantic triple
into the leaf embedding space, as shown in Fig 5. During training, masking leaf nodes enables the training
of relation embeddings with backpropagation, as shown in Fig. 6.
The attention decay mask encodes the spatial distance between graph nodes. The core idea is that attention
between two nodes should decrease with respect to their distance. Following Gradformer (Liu et al., 2024a),
we use an exponential function with base 0 < λ < 1 and the shortest path in the exponent. To adjust Grad-
former’s exponential mask for vocabulary sequence graphs that experimentally need a smoother attention
decay with respect to the shortest path, we introduce a square root in the exponent.


                                                                 16
                               Before H-GAT                                                                   After H-GAT

                          l1      l2    l3         H-GAT(l1, rel, h1)                                     l1'     l2    l3

                                                                        l1'
                                  rel                                                                             rel

                                                               dim(t1') = dim(t1)
              t       t           h1     h2            t                                        t         t       h1        h2      t

                                                                              Every non-empty tail token embedding is replaced with f(h, r, t),
                           token embeddings only
                                                                                 where h, t -- token embeddings, r -- relation embedding


Figure 5: Semantic embedding derivation on leaves (only three leaves are shown). hi : head token, li : leaf
token, t: syntactic context token. For every injected triple, H-GAT fuses each leaf token with the relation
and all the head tokens, yielding an embedding of the same dimension as the initial leaf token embedding.
The derived embedding replaces the initial leaf embedding.


                          Before H-GAT                                             After H-GAT
                                                                                                                                        Transformer layer
                   MASK           l2         l3                                l1'        l2'       l3'           To transformer              ...
                                                                                                                       layers
                                                                                                                                        Transformer layer
                                  rel                                                     rel
                                                                                                                                         Cross-entropy
          t           t           h1         h2            t        t          t          h1         h2            t                         loss


                                                                Every leaf token embedding is fused with relation                      The gradient will
    If leaf node is masked, it contributes to loss
                                                                 embedding and entire head token embeddings                        backpropagate from loss
                                                                                                                                      to the masked t1.

                  Backpropagation path: loss → transformer layers → H-GAT → input token embeddings.



Figure 6: Relation embedding training. The sequence with updated leaf embeddings is passed to the trans-
former layers. The masked nodes (both roots and leaves) contribute to the loss calculation. For masked
leaves, the gradient flows back to them through H-GAT, updating the relation embeddings.


The shortest path for every node pair is calculated using the Floyd-Warshall algorithm:

                                                  sp(i, j) ∈ RN ×N , N = number of input nodes                                                               (6)

The exponential decay mask is an N × N matrix defined as:
                                                √
                          f (sp(i, j)) ≜ λGELU ( sp(i,j)−p) , 0 < λ < 1                                                                                      (7)
                                        GELU = xΦ(x),
                                        Φ(x) — Gaussian cumulative distribution function,

where p is a learnable parameter and λ is a hyperparameter. For sp(i, j) ≤ p, the activation function,
GELU (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2023), zeroes the exponent, making the mask close to zero for nodes with the
shortest path less than or equal to the learned p. Finally, we multiply the attention weights A ∈ RN ×N by
the mask elementwise, effectively incorporating spatial distance in the attention mechanism.

                                                               Ã = A ⊙ f,              Ã ∈ RN ×N                                                           (8)

The exponential mask is shared across all attention layers.


                                                                                   17
4.2.2     GraphMERT Training

As explained earlier, we represent each sentence as a leafy chain graph G whose root nodes are text tokens,
and graft semantic leaf nodes from a seed KG onto entity/mention spans via relation edges. GraphMERT
jointly pretrains using MLM over syntactic tokens and MNM over semantic leaves: We randomly select
spans in either space and train the model to reconstruct the missing words and/or KG leaves. This setup
couples the transformer’s token encoder with the H-GAT relation encoder so that the surface form and KG
semantics align during pretraining.

                                      X                                                   
                       LMLM (θ) = −          log pθ xt G\Mg ∪Mx       + LSBO xt G\Mg ∪Mx                    (9)
                                                                  
                                                                                                ,
                                      t∈Mx
                                      X
                      LMNM (θ) = −           log pθ gℓ G\Mg ∪Mx ,                                          (10)
                                                               

                                      ℓ∈Mg

                           L(θ) = LMLM (θ) + µ LMNM (θ),                                                   (11)

where x denotes the input token sequence; G is the text chain graph augmented with KG leaf nodes; Mx and
Mg are the masked text and leaf spans, respectively; xt is a masked token target; gℓ is a masked semantic
leaf target (as a leaf-span explained below); LSBO (xt ) is span boundary loss on Mx (explained below); θ
denotes all model parameters (transformer + H-GAT); and µ > 0 balances the two losses (we use µ = 1).
Both objectives use span-wise masking.
In GraphMERT, H-GAT is responsible for training semantic relation embeddings. Dropout on relation
embeddings prevents overfitting on scarce semantic examples. In parallel, transformer attention trains the
remaining network parameters, attending jointly to tokens from both the syntactic and semantic spaces.
GraphMERT is trained with a span-masking schema. Empirically, span masking tightens alignment among
the top-k tokens predicted within a single leaf. Later, better-aligned tokens result in more nuanced com-
binations when constructing complete tails. We discuss the top-k predicted token combination stage in
Sec. 4.4.
From the syntactic stream, we exactly follow the span masking implementation, which sums regular masked
objective with span boundary loss of SpanBERT (Joshi et al., 2020). In the semantic space, however, we
introduce a modification: Whenever a leaf span is selected (with a standard MLM/MNM probability of
0.15), we mask all the leaf tokens rather than sampling span length from the geometric distribution, which
could mask a leaf subset for a given root. In other words, Mg and Mx follow different masking schemas.
The rationale for this stems from backpropagation. Relation embeddings must receive gradients from the
entire tail so that they can capture its full meaning, not just fragments from individual tokens. Since the
semantic meaning of a relation manifests only across the complete tail expression, masking the whole leaf
ensures that gradients reflect the whole semantic unit.

4.3     High-quality Text Sources and Dataset Preprocessing for GraphMERT Training

Our framework focuses on domains with stringent factuality requirements. The compact GraphMERT
model makes it feasible to train exclusively on limited expert-verified open-source texts. This approach
takes an essential step toward reliable KG extraction: Data cleaning reduces hallucinations and training on
scientific corpora can substantially limit domain-specific errors (Li et al., 2024). Reliance on expert-verified
data prevents importing spurious facts from vast, tainted corpora.
Data quality requirements apply equally to the seed KG. The seed KG is a set of domain-specific triples that
serve as initial relation examples for the model. As the full training set in the semantic space, the seed KG
defines the relation set for the extracted KG. Its quality, therefore, is of utmost significance in training of
robust semantic relation embeddings in GraphMERT. A seed KG can be obtained from an external source,
provided that it satisfies the following two conditions:

        1. It contains clean, domain-specific data.


                                                         18
        2. It has a sufficiently diverse vocabulary.

Condition (1) provides the foundation for learning accurate relation embeddings and Condition (2) prevents
relation embedding overfitting on a small set of tokens. To obtain a domain-specific seed KG that meets
these requirements, we suggest either selecting a relevant, well-curated external KG or generating one (see
Sec. 4.5), followed by thorough cleaning.
After obtaining a KG, we apply a similarity filter to it against the training data (see Sec. 4.3.1), which
ensures alignment with the target domain [Condition (1)] and identification of the triples most relevant to
the context (see Sec. 4.3.2). The algorithm for selecting the best matches, described in Sec. 4.3.3, addresses
vocabulary diversity [Condition (2)]. This algorithm selects triples from the external KG to position them
within the semantic space in the chain graphs, given the potential spots for triple heads within the syntactic
space. For domain-specific head discovery in the dataset, we use a helper LLM.

4.3.1     Entity Linking

Although GraphMERT is applicable to any domain-specific text corpora, we leverage biomedical knowl-
edge in the UMLS to develop a multi-stage process to link entities discovered in the text to concepts in
UMLS. This process ensures that identified entities are mapped to standardized Concept Unique Identifiers
(CUIs), facilitating the subsequent retrieval of structured information from the UMLS KG. We combine both
embedding similarity and string similarity.

Stage 1: Embedding-based candidate retrieval: The initial stage aims to rapidly identify a set of
potential candidate concepts from the vast UMLS ontology. This is achieved by representing both the
discovered source entities (queries) and the target UMLS entities in a shared high-dimensional vector space.
We use SapBERT (Lim & Kim, 2022), an encoder-only language model specifically pre-trained on biomedical
knowledge from UMLS, which is able to capture the nuanced difference between biomedical terms. Each
discovered head entity and every UMLS entity is processed through SapBERT to produce a unique vector
embedding.
To efficiently search through millions of UMLS entity embeddings, we employ an Approximate Nearest
Neighbor (ANN) algorithm. ANN constructs a pre-computed index of the UMLS embeddings, enabling
highly efficient retrieval of the top-k most similar vectors for a given query vector. For each discovered
entity, we use this method to retrieve the top 10 UMLS candidates based on the cosine similarity of their
embeddings.

Stage 2: Fine-grained filtering with string matching: The top candidates from embedding-based
retrieval are then subjected to a more rigorous filtering process based on string similarity. We use character-
level 3-grams (char-3grams) as a robust string comparison. Each entity name is represented as a set of
char-3grams, which can be easily compared with others using standard set-based similarity metrics. We
compute Jaccard similarity between the 3-gram sets of the source entity and each of the 10 candidate
entities:
                                                          |A ∩ B|
                                       J(A, B) =
                                                    |A| + |B| − |A ∩ B|

A candidate entity is confirmed as a valid link only if its Jaccard similarity score is greater than the threshold.
The threshold is set to 0.5 based on manual inspection. The entities that successfully pass both stages are
considered the final Linked UMLS Entities and are used for the following task.

4.3.2     Contextual Triple Selection

Following the entity linking stage, each input sequence is associated with a set of UMLS concepts. While
these links grant access to the structured knowledge within UMLS, a single concept can be involved in
hundreds of triples, many of which may be irrelevant to the specific context of the source text. Therefore, a
crucial subsequent step is to identify and select only the most contextually relevant triples for each sequence.


                                                        19
        "Syntactic"        "Semantic" data source                                        inject triple OR discard triple
        data source




                                        similarity                                              Injection:
                 entity                 matching       All triples                         maximize tail similarity
               discovery                with text                                           and triple diversity

                                                                            Leafy chain graphs

                                                                                         PAD      PAD



                                                     Matched triples
                                                                             PAD   PAD   PAD      PAD     PAD
                      I                                                II                                                  III
                                                                                   Leaves contain injected triples


Figure 7: Data preparation for GraphMERT. To find the most relevant triples, we perform semantic
similarity matching of triples to dataset sequences. The triple head should almost literally match one of
the entities discovered in Step (I); from them, we pick the top triples whose tails are semantically close to
the sequence. All matched triples are subject to the injection algorithm (III), which selects the top-scoring
triples and limits the number of equivalent triples. The injected triples together comprise a seed KG.



We perform this selection using an embedding-based relevance-ranking procedure. For each sequence, we
begin by retrieving the complete set of triples from the UMLS KG where any of the linked entities from that
sequence appear as the head entity. We compute a semantic relevance score for each triple with respect to
the original input sequence. We exclude triples with undesired relations from the search: relations that are
not useful to have in the KG (see Table A1 in Appendix A).
Specifically, each retrieved triple, consisting of a head, relation, and tail, is transformed into a linearized
sentence by concatenating its components with spaces. We encode both the original input sequence and
the sentence formed by each triple into high-dimensional vectors using the Gemini embedding model, text-
embedding-004, and use cosine similarity as the semantic relevance score. For each linked entity, we rank its
associated triples by their semantic relevance scores and retain the top 40 triples. The resulting contextually
filtered set of triples is then used in the subsequent injection process.


4.3.3     Seed KG Injection

The KG injection algorithm prepares a GraphMERT-compatible dataset of leafy chain graphs by selecting
relevant triples from an external KG source (potentially, limited in size) based on their similarity score to the
input sequence, thresholded with a hyperparameter α. At the same time, the algorithm maintains diversity
in the injected relations and semantic vocabulary. All triples selected by the algorithm comprise the seed
KG. In this process (see Fig. 7), triples are mapped to the chain graph semantic space: The head is placed at
a root node and the tail at the root’s leaf node. Critically, the injected triples must be contextually relevant
to the sequence. This aligns transformer attention with H-GAT during training on the chain graphs, as both
attend to the semantic and syntactic spaces simultaneously; otherwise, the attention layers would get a noisy
signal from extraneous tokens. Furthermore, because both H-GAT and transformer attention jointly train
GraphMERT relation embeddings, alignment between leaf and root tokens enables vocabulary transfer
from the syntactic root space into the semantic leaf space. This process forms integrated representations
that support the retrieval of novel tails from a shared embedding space during prediction.


                                                          20
Why do we need an injection algorithm? A naive strategy would be to inject the top-scoring triple
for each head out of all the matched ones. We now demonstrate why a triple with the best similarity to a
sequence may be suboptimal for both (a) populating the semantic space and (b) GraphMERT training.

(a) Limitations for the semantic space: Similarity matching favors frequent terms in the dataset
(Zhou et al., 2022). Hence, triples with common domain-specific keywords in tails score highly across many
sequences. As a result, a small set of triples achieves high similarity scores across a large number of sequences.
If only top matches were to be chosen, these ubiquitous tails would dominate the semantic space, suppressing
rarer but semantically valuable tails that introduce novel terms into the semantic space. The scoring is also
biased towards classificatory relations like isa or inverse_isa, since they often restate the head (e.g.,
⟨fibrosing interstitial lung diseases, isa, fibrosis of lung⟩ in a biomedical KG). Such close textual matches
contribute little new information.

(b) Limitations for GraphMERT training: Over-injecting frequent tokens leads to a skewed training
distribution. If the semantic space vocabulary is dominated by a few tokens, relation embeddings overfit on
them, causing GraphMERT to predict a narrow token subset. Likewise, certain relations, e.g., “isa” and
“inverse_isa,” would dominate the limited spots for injected triples, suppressing all other relations. Thus,
GraphMERT will be undertrained on the other relations.

Design goals:     To address these limitations, we design the injection algorithm around three goals:

      1. Eliminate low-relevance matched triples.

      2. Select one triple (“inject”) per head out of all matched with the sequence.

      3. Diversify injected relations by balancing examples across all relations.

Goal (1) can be satisfied by thresholding similarity scores. However, Goals (2) and (3) cannot be enforced
independently: Selecting only the top match achieves (2) but undermines (3), amplifying certain top-scored
relations, such as “isa”. The algorithm must enforce (2) and (3) jointly, balancing contextual relevance with
relation diversity. The proposed KG injection algorithm iteratively drops undesired triples from all matched
triples in two interleaving phases: first, by maximizing the score; second, by maximizing the diversity of
relations. The surviving triples are “injected” into the semantic space and comprise the seed KG. We defer
the description and implementation details to Appendix B.

4.4   GraphMERT Pipeline for Knowledge Graph Extraction

We distill internal GraphMERT representations from the trained GraphMERT into explicit graph triples
by adding leaf nodes. Using purely-MNM prediction, we distill semantic knowledge directly from Graph-
MERT weights, conditioned on a sequence from which we want to extract a triple. The role of a sequence
in our framework is analogous to the role of a prompt in LLM-based KG generation, but our prediction is
unambiguous and deterministic.
Fig. 8 shows the execution order of the framework components. Fig. 9 illustrates the first pipeline step.
Starting with the syntactic corpus (no KG injections), we sample head (h) spans from the syntactic space
(root nodes) and assign an outgoing relation (r). We then create the corresponding tail slot (t, leaf) for
the chosen relation and initialize it with masks. We then ask the model to predict the masked tail (leaf)
conditioned on the head, relation, and the rest of the sequence. The top-k predictions for each masked leaf
yield k candidate tokens, which serve as building blocks for tails of each head–relation pair ⟨h, r⟩. Next, a
helper LLM combines predicted tail tokens into coherent phrases, followed by a cleaning step. We further
filter the generated triples by computing semantic similarity between each triple and its source sequence,
discarding those with a score below the user-defined similarity check threshold β. GraphMERT may predict
a tail that connects a head with a semantically related concept across the training corpus, and hyperparameter
β regulates the fraction of such triples in the output. A higher β yields fewer but more sequence-specific
triples, often explicitly included in the text. A lower β allows for broader, more general (yet semantically


                                                       21
                                                  Relation
                                                matching with
                                                    LLM


       Training        Entity        Similarity matching                         Predict tails     Combine tail     Similarity check
                                                                     Train                                                             Expanded
    dataset: high-   discovery          with UMLS                                   with           tokens with       (embedding-
                                                                  GraphMERT                                                               KG
     quality texts   with LLM        (embedding-based)                           GraphMERT            LLM               based)


                                                                                LLM-based              GraphMERT-             Embedding-based
                                           Seed KG                                 step                 based step                 step
                                                                                Input/output            Arrows indicate temporal
                                                                                   data                 progression


  Figure 8: GraphMERT Pipeline flowchart with temporal execution ordering of the main components.




                           PubMed papers (training dataset)                     PubMed papers (training dataset)
                                  Sequence with all leaves empty                   Sequence with one masked leaf

                                                                                     PAD         PAD    MASK
                                    PAD         PAD         PAD




                                                                                     PAD         PAD     PAD
                                    PAD         PAD         PAD


                                 1. Choose a head for triple to                      2. Mask its leaf and set the
                                        be predicted                                       target relation
                       PubMed papers (training dataset)
                                                                               k tokens
                             PAD          PAD




                             PAD          PAD         PAD


                            3. Predict the masked leaf               4. Extract raw triples:       5. Form final triples
                              tokens (top k) with the                head + relation + k tail       for this head (with
                               trained GraphMERT                       token candidates              multi-token tails)



Figure 9: Prediction of triple tails. The trained GraphMERT predicts the top k tokens for a masked leaf
and the chosen relation, resulting in a set of raw triples with the same head.



related) triples that may not be explicitly mentioned in the sequence. However, if β is set too low, the output
becomes flooded with triples that merely restate general truths, reflecting statistically dominant statements
in the training dataset.
The surviving ⟨h, r, t⟩ triples expand the KG with novel facts. Importantly, each prediction is traceable
to its source sequence, while at the same time accumulating knowledge distilled from the entire training
corpus. This global knowledge accumulation contrasts with RAG methods, which remain local to retrieved
documents. Further, RAG is a post-hoc data attribution mechanism, unlike ours.


                                                                          22
Role of the helper LLM: The laborious (grammatical) part of the work is carried out with help from an
LLM and the essential (triple extraction) part done with GraphMERT. In this pipeline, the helper LLM
performs three auxiliary tasks: discovering head entities, selecting relations for subsequent GraphMERT
prediction, and combining single-token predictions into meaningful, relation-aware tail phrases. Critically,
the LLM is constrained: It cannot invent new entities or relations, as heads must be present in the dataset,
relations are restricted to the seed KG, and only GraphMERT-predicted tokens are allowed to be in tails.

Why do we need a helper LLM for combining tokens? An encoder-only model does not address
span decoding. Masked span prediction would still be challenging for a small model, given the very limited
number of semantic examples. Here, two factors come into play:

        1. For a coherent span prediction, each token should be conditioned on other tokens. However, in
           an encoder-only model prediction, each masked token in the span is conditioned on the sequence
           independently of other span tokens.

        2. In our experiments, training with span masking results in a prediction where tokens in the syntactic
           space are better aligned with each other within a span; however, the semantic space has orders of
           magnitude fewer examples (104 in our experiments). Given the limited scale of the semantic space,
           how to achieve the same effect on leaves remains an open question.

Thus, training on small corpora to some extent trades English proficiency for data quality. Exploring methods
to augment GraphMERT and thereby remove the LLM-based combining-tokens step is an avenue for future
work.

4.5     LLM-generated KG

To provide a fair and robust comparison for our framework, we construct a baseline LLM KG using a
standard LLM-based pipeline that follows the GraphRAG indexing methodology, with a filtering step to
align its schema with the GraphMERT KG.
The process begins by segmenting the source documents into smaller, manageable text chunks. An LLM is
then prompted to perform open information extraction on each chunk, which involves identifying entities,
extracting the relationships between them, and generating short, descriptive summaries for each entity. We
retain only the relationships that are part of our pre-defined relation set, discarding all others. This ensures
that the resulting LLM KG shares exactly the same relational schema as our framework, enabling a direct
and equitable comparison of performance. After filtering, the extracted elements are subsequently aggregated
and consolidated into a final graph structure. To handle multiple mentions of the same concept, exact string
matching is used to resolve entities into unique nodes. Relationships that are generated multiple times
between the same two entities are aggregated into a single edge.

4.6     KG Verification

We can subdivide KG verification methods into two categories: graph-level and triple-level.

4.6.1     Graph-level Verification

This method evaluates the KG as a whole. It focuses on its logical coherence, internal consistency, compre-
hensiveness, coverage, important aspects of domain-relevant knowledge, and depth (considering whether it
contains rich, insightful connections beyond surface-level facts). Graph-level approaches typically operate
by retrieving relevant subgraphs and evaluating their quality with respect to these criteria.

GraphRAG: We employ GraphRAG to evaluate the KGs and benchmark them across various tasks.
The KGs are used as the primary source of information in GraphRAG to answer medical questions, which
enables us to compare their effectiveness directly. In our implementation, we use the Local Search method
from GraphRAG and modify it to rely exclusively on the entities and relations in the querying stage. This


                                                       23
process begins by identifying a set of entities within the KG that are semantically related to the user query.
These entities act as entry points for the retrieval of connected entities and relationships. The retrieved
data sources are then ranked and filtered to fit within a single predefined context window, which is used to
generate a response to the user query.

4.6.2    Triple-level Verification

At the triple level, verification can enhance factuality and validity, as we describe next.

FActScore: The FActScore framework (Min et al., 2023) provides a fine-grained method for evaluating
factual precision in long-form LLM outputs. Its principles transfer naturally to KG verification. FActScore
evaluates atomic facts, i.e., short, self-contained statements, against a trusted text source that does not have
any knowledge conflicts or overlaps. KG triples can be treated as atomic facts of equal importance. In our
setting, each triple can be paired with a reliable text source: GraphMERT triples with sequences and LLM
triples with short chunks, both drawn from the same trustworthy source. The short context length minimizes
conflicts and overlaps.

FActScore*: We follow the Retrieve → LM variant of automatic evaluation, in which an atomic fact is
concatenated with the knowledge source and provided to the model. However, we strengthen triple evaluation
with validity: In the prompt, we require verification of triple logical alignment in addition to context support,
since the fact may appear in the text, yet the triple may still be malformed. Malformed triples should not be
deemed reliable facts and would inflate the score. Because our prompt departs from the original FActScore
prompt, we denote the modified version as FActScore*. Formally, let G be a set of triples τ , and C(τ ) the
text source of τ . Then FActScore* for G is:

                                       f (τ ) = I[τ is supported by C(τ )],
                                                                                                            (12)
                                         FActScore*(G) = Eτ ∈G [f (τ )].

ValidityScore: Triples should follow semantic rules of a KG. For example, in UMLS (Bodenreider, 2004),
the triple ⟨beta-receptor, part_of, plasma membrane⟩ is valid, since part_of denotes a meronymic (struc-
tural/spatial) relation: Every instance of the part must be a constituent of some instance of the whole.
It follows, then, that ⟨beta-receptor, part_of, adrenergic signaling⟩ is invalid, because it links a physical
structure to a biological process. Similarly, ⟨beta-receptor, part_of, human⟩ is factually plausible but still
an illegitimate usage, since it violates granularity: The correct wholes are specific structures (e.g., plasma
membrane), not entire organisms.
To quantitatively measure the validity of triples, we propose ValidityScore. It isolates ontological alignment
of triples as an independent mode of evaluation. Concretely, we use a strong LLM judge to semantically
validate a triple using the following prompt.

    Prompt. Evaluate if these medical KG triples are valid (yes/no/maybe) and give a very short reason
    why: ⟨list of triples⟩.

Then ValidityScore counts the number of “yes” responses.

5     Experimental Setup

To demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework, we extract a high-quality diabetes KG from a Graph-
MERT-compatible diabetes training dataset obtained from expert-verified sources. This section provides an
in-depth explanation of the proposed training, extraction, and evaluation pipeline.

5.1     GraphMERT Training and Extraction

Next, we discuss training data preparation and triple extraction.


                                                       24
                                               Table 1: Dataset size

                                               Abstracts      Tokens     Sequences
                               Training           350k        124.7M           989,666
                               Evaluation         39k          13.9M           110,297

Table 2: Seed KG statistics for α = 0.55 (after Qwen3-32B). We obtain this seed KG based on the 1.1258E+06
matched UMLS triples with a similarity score greater than or equal to α.

                     Triples      Similarity       Similarity    Similarity         Number of
                     count       score mean      score median    score max           relations
                      28533         0.613            0.605             0.848             28



5.1.1   Training Data Preparation

We showcase our framework in a sensitive medical domain, where concerns over trustworthiness of AI output
remain the main barrier to wider AI adoption (Wang et al., 2025b; Mishra et al., 2024), despite the undeniable
potential of AI in medical practice. As a case study, we set the goal of extracting a high-quality diabetes KG.
It all starts with high-quality textual data. We build a GraphMERT-compatible diabetes training dataset
(Table 1) from two main sources: (1) peer-reviewed medical abstracts from MEDLINE journals accessed via
PubMed Central, and (2) a seed KG derived from the UMLS Metathesaurus (Bodenreider, 2004).

Text corpus: MEDLINE is the National Library of Medicine’s bibliographic database and is accessible via
PubMed. MEDLINE selects journals based on rigorous criteria and indexes them using MeSH terms. We
retrieved diabetes-related papers from PubMed Central (see the query in Listing 1 in Appendix A), removed
non-English records, parsed abstracts using the PubMed parser (Achakulvisut et al., 2020), lowercased all
text, and filtered out opening boilerplate words such as “Abstract,” “Background,” “Introduction,” etc.,
with a regular expression. The resulting dataset contains 350k abstracts for training and 39k for evaluation,
totaling 124.7M and 13.9M tokens, respectively.

Seed KG: From UMLS, we select SNOMED CT, US and GO (Gene Ontology) vocabularies because
together they cover a broad range of biomedical concepts across clinical documentation, molecular biology,
and data exchange. We exclude low-value relations (more details in Appendix A) and retrieve triples relevant
to our dataset sequences based on semantic similarity matching (Sec. 4.3.1) with Gemini text-embedding-004.
For matched triples, we use an injection algorithm (Sec. 4.3.3) with a similarity threshold α of 0.55, validated
experimentally via grid search using GraphRAG evaluation (see Sec. 6.4.1). The resulting triples that are
injected comprise the seed KG (Table 2). Statistics per relation are presented in Table B1 (Appendix B)
As a helper LLM, we employ Qwen3-32B-FP8 (an 8-bit quantized version of Qwen3-32B, further referred
to as Qwen3-32B), an open-source, advanced, and lightweight LLM with “thinking mode” turned on. We
always use “thinking mode,” unless otherwise specified.

Entity discovery and relation matching: For head discovery, we prompt Qwen3-32B with each abstract
sequence in the dataset with few-shot examples, asking it to search for medical entities that are relevant
to diabetes and its comorbidities. From our observations, changing an example in the prompt significantly
changes the number of discovered entities. The outputs are validated against sequences of origin to eliminate
hallucinated or misspelled entities. For relation discovery, Qwen3-32B is few-shot prompted with a relation
list from the corresponding training seed KG to match entities with all relations that make sense for a given
entity in the context of the current sequence. Prompts and examples are presented in Appendix E.
All Qwen3-32B runs are performed on the Princeton cluster on one H100 GPU using vLLM with the vendor-
recommended sampling parameters: temperature = 0.6, top_p = 0.95, top_k = 20, and min_p = 0. In
addition, max_tokens and max_model_len are set to 8192, which is sufficient for our generation length.


                                                         25
                2nd root's leaves:                                                           II. Visual representation of the encoding
                138-142 are pads
                                               139        140     141
                                       138                                     142
                               1                          2                             3
                              with                       t1dm                          ...              ...           ...

                                              136                 137
                                               diabetes       mellitus


                            128 roots                                                  128 x 7 leaf tokens


            1         2         ...            128         129           ...     135            136           ...    142        ...

                                                              1st root's leaves                    2nd root's leaves
          I. Chain graph encoding in the training data            (7 tokens)                          (7 tokens)



Figure 10: Leafy chain graph encoded sequentially: 7-leaf case. The sequence has a fixed length of 1024.
The first 128 tokens are reserved for roots and leaves reside in the remaining tokens. The first group of seven
leaves belongs to the first root, the second group of seven leaves belongs to the second root, and so on. Each
leaf token group is padded to the maximum length of seven.


Chain graphs for training: Chain graphs are initialized with 128 root nodes, each connected to seven
leaves, leading to a 1024-token sequence (see Fig. 10). These numbers are chosen to fit GPU memory
constraints while providing sufficient room for semantic tokens dedicated to leaves.

5.1.2   GraphMERT Training

We train GraphMERT with 12 hidden layers, eight attention heads, a hidden size of 512, and an interme-
diate size of a fully-connected layer of 2048, totaling 79.7M trainable parameters. We use the BioMedBERT
tokenizer (Chakraborty et al., 2020), trained on a vast amount of medical vocabulary, to prevent frequent
subword tokenization of common medical terms, which is particularly beneficial for the extraction stage.
The tokenizer determines the vocabulary size, which is 30,522.
Training runs for 25 epochs on four H100 GPUs with BF16 precision, totaling 90 GPU hours. We use an
instantaneous batch size of 32 per GPU, achieving an effective batch size of 128 through gradient accumu-
lation (steps = 2). We set dropout rates at 0.1 for regular, attention, and activation dropouts. In addition,
we set an exponential mask with base λ = 0.6 and relation embedding dropout of 0.3. We train the model
using the cosine learning rate scheduler with the maximum learning rate set to 4 × 10−4 . We use 500 steps
for warm-up. The weight decay at each step is 0.01 times the learning rate at that step. We stop training
when the learning rate reaches 1 × 10−5 . In the span masking training schema, we limit masked spans to a
maximum length of seven, matching the number of leaf nodes connected to root nodes.

5.1.3   Triple Extraction

The triple extraction pipeline runs the following steps, as shown in Fig. 11. We begin with a leaf-masked
prediction over the training dataset, given head entities and their relations. This produces a vocabulary
distribution for each masked leaf. From this distribution, we select the top 20 tokens per leaf and use them
to prompt the helper LLM, Qwen3-32B. Conditioned on the head, relation, and the originating sequence,
the LLM combines these tokens into coherent, relevant, and medically meaningful multi-token tails (see
Appendix E for the prompt specification). When no valid tail can be formed, the corresponding ⟨sequence,
head, relation⟩ is skipped. Next, since the LLM may hallucinate tails outside the GraphMERT-predicted


                                                                     26
         I. GraphMERT pipeline
                             among people with diabetes, .. 5% of all diabetic patients had adequate glycemic control,
                                respectively. in the multivariable logistic regression analysis, there was a significant
             Sequence:
                              relationship between female gender, age over 40, living in the urban area, being in the
                                    third wealth quintile and having health insurance with diabetes prevalence...
              Sequence           Input                                     Top k GraphMERT tail candidates
             < diabetes,                               1                system, structure, endocrine, digestive,
         has_finding_site,? >                                           health, of, diabetes, 2, ii, metabolic,
                                                                        function, conditions, ,, gastrointestinal,
                Combine              Helper                     Trained
                                                                        condition, heart, intestinal, type,
              GraphMERT                                       GraphMERT
                                      LLM                               hypertension, underlying
            tokens into triple
                  tails
                                                2

          < diabetes, has_finding_site,                                         Embeddings similarity filter
               endocrine system>
                                                                                  Sequence         triple 1
          < diabetes, has_finding_site,                                                                          score
                     heart>
                                                                    3

                                                                                  Sequence        triple 2
                                                                                                               score
                 Formed triples for this sequence:
                    < diabetes, has_finding_site,
         Output                                                                          < diabetes, has_finding_site,
                         endocrine system>
                                                                                                 urban area>

                                                                                              II. LLM KG pipeline



Figure 11: I. Forming triple tails for a given sequence with GraphMERT. (1) Given a sequence as a context,
a triple head in the sequence, and a relation, GraphMERT predicts the tail token (we obtain the top 20).
(2) The helper LLM attempts to combine the tokens into a complete, coherent medical term. It may output
several or no tail candidates to complete the triple. (3) We evaluate the similarity score between triples from
the previous step and the sequence of origin. Only triples with a score higher than a preset threshold pass.
II. An example of a triple extracted with the LLM pipeline (Qwen3-32B) from the same context. Here,
LLM misinterprets the “has_finding_site” relation, treating “site” as a location instead of an anatomical
structure, which results in an invalid triple.




token space, we discard any output tails that contain out-of-scope tokens. The output of this stage is a set
of completed candidate tails.
Next, each candidate triple is evaluated with a similarity matching algorithm (Sec. 4.3.1). Specifically, we
compute the cosine similarity between the triple and its originating sequence using Gemini embeddings.
All triples with a score below the similarity check threshold β = 0.67 (obtained through grid search, see
Sec. 6.4.1) are discarded. The remaining set forms the final collection of extracted triples.
Table 3 illustrates the step-by-step triple extraction process for a representative sequence. Given a sequence
with its head and relation, GraphMERT predicts a token in a masked tail. From the output distribution,
we select the top 20 tokens as candidate tails, striking a balance between prediction quality and diversity,
and providing a sufficient pool for subsequent token combination. We may construct zero, one, or several
novel triples out of these.


                                                             27
Table 3: Examples of GraphMERT-extracted triples (UMLS-style) from a single sequence. We pass the
sequence with two marked heads together with relations for these heads to the trained GraphMERT. After
GraphMERT makes a prediction in the semantic space, we use the top 20 predicted tokens to form complete
triples with a helper LLM. “##” is a separator for subword tokens.

 Sequence 1: . . . ##2 The Authors. The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of
 The Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is one of
 the main causes of chronic liver disease worldwide. Flavonoids, a group of natural compounds, have garnered a
 great deal of attention in the management of NAFLD because of their profitable effects on glucose and lipid
 metabolism, inflammation, and oxidative stress which are the pivotal pathophysiological pathways in NAFLD.
 Naringenin is a citrus-derived flavonoid with a broad spectrum of potential biological effects including
 anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties, which may. . .
 Head, Relation                                      Top-20 GraphMERT-predicted tokens
 naringenin, isa                  flavonoid ##in flav nar ##idin ##arin ##flav compound ##ce hydrolase
                                  plant ##ingen ##ono protein polysaccharide polyphenol family ##anol -
                                  ##onin
 naringenin, plays_role           therapeutic neuroprotective ##ingen antidepressant role medicinal ##arin
                                  flavonoid action baical inhibitory antibacterial bioactive medicine antimicrobial
                                  ##idin quercetin ##flav potential flavon
 naringenin, has_disposition      nar flavonoid ##in hydrolase ##arin inhibitor - ##anol compound ##idin
                                  amy ##flav ##ingen derivative amide receptor acid family alkaloid product
 non-alcoholic fatty liver dis-   liver disease alcoholic fatty ##osclerosis nafld steatosis disorder ##atitis
 ease, cause_of                   ##ohep hypercholesterolemia hepatic - with syndrome mellitus myopathy
                                  fibrosis diseases hyperlipidemia
 non-alcoholic fatty liver dis-   hyperlipidemia disorder alcoholic obesity - dyslipidemia myopathy liver
 ease, associated_with            hereditary hypercholesterolemia syndrome ##ament ##tr associated ##lip
                                  fatty disease ##oid mellitus related
 Head                             Relation                                  Tail (formed from the
                                                                            GraphMERT-predicted tokens)
 naringenin                       isa                                       flavonoid
 naringenin                       plays_role                                therapeutic role
 naringenin                       has_disposition                           flavonoid
 non-alcoholic fatty liver dis-   cause_of                                  fibrosis
 ease
 non-alcoholic fatty liver dis-   associated_with                           obesity
 ease



5.2     LLM-extracted KG

Following the default GraphRAG indexing parameters, our diabetes corpus is split into 2,000-token chunks
and processed by Qwen3-32B to extract entities and relationships. We enable the model’s thinking mode
and set temperature = 0.6, top_p = 0.95, top_k = 20, max_tokens = 8192. The detailed prompt for
extraction is shown in Appendix E1 and an example is shown in Appendix E2. After parsing and cleaning,
the final LLM-generated KG contains 272,346 triples.

5.3     Evaluation with GraphRAG

Next, we provide details of GraphRAG evaluations.

5.3.1    GraphRAG Settings

Our experimental setup uses Qwen3-14B as the backbone LLM in GraphRAG, with inference accelerated
using the vLLM library. For all evaluations, we enable the model’s thinking mode and set temperature = 0.6,
top_p = 0.95, top_k = 20, and max_tokens = 8192. To ensure the reliability of our findings, each


                                                         28
experiment is conducted three times with different random seeds (1, 2, and 3). We report the average
accuracy across these runs in our final results.
The GraphRAG query process is configured with nomic-embed-text-v1 as the embedding model. To construct
the context for each query, the system retrieves the top 30 entities and the top 10 relationships per entity,
with the maximum context length capped at 12,000 tokens. Furthermore, we tailor the system prompts and
simplify the output table structure to better suit our tasks. The complete prompt is given in Appendix E3.
The modified table schema is also detailed in Appendix E4.

5.3.2    Benchmark Evaluation

We further verify the quality of our extracted KGs on the diabetes subsets of medical benchmarks: ICD-
Bench (Dedhia et al., 2025), MedMCQA, MedQA, and MMLU (medical). ICD-Bench is a targeted question-
answering benchmark aligned with the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) taxonomy (World
Health Organization, 1992), designed to evaluate domain-specific medical reasoning in language models
across 15 medical sub-specialties. We primarily evaluate the extracted KGs on ICD-Bench, as it is the
only benchmark that has a dedicated endocrinology subset; for this reason, we defer the other results to
Appendix D. For evaluation, we employ GraphRAG to answer benchmark questions.
To address the domain mismatch between our diabetes-specialized model, GraphMERT, and general med-
ical benchmarks, we create domain-specific evaluation subsets. First, we synthesize our training corpus into
an approximately 2000-word summary using Gemini 2.5 Pro. Subsequently, we use this summary to prompt
a Qwen3-32B model to filter the question-answer pairs in each benchmark, retaining only questions relevant
to the summary. All GraphRAG evaluations are then conducted on these filtered subsets to ensure a fair
assessment.

5.3.3    Traceability and User Verification

Allowing users to judge correctness is a simple but powerful principle. OpenAI’s WebGPT (Nakano et al.,
2022) addresses this by browsing the web and citing sources, a strategy also adopted by Perplexity AI. In
these systems, the user decides (1) whether the source is credible and (2) whether the output is factual. Our
framework builds on this idea: Each triple is directly traceable to its originating sequence. This enables
automatic cross-checking, rather than searching external sources. The system retrieves the sequence from
which the triple is derived. Since this sequence originates from a verified paper abstract, users can further
validate the fact by consulting the source publication if needed.

6     Experimental Results

Next, we provide evaluation results for GraphMERT and LLM KGs on the benchmarks.

6.1     Description of the Extracted KG

Table 4 summarizes the statistics of the extracted KG. It inherits the 28 relations from the seed KG (men-
tioned in Table 2) but contains approximately four times as many triples; the comparison chart (Fig. C1)
is presented in Appendix C. The extracted triples include vocabulary that extends beyond the seed KG. As
expected, novel heads originate from the training dataset, which has a richer vocabulary than the seed KG.
GraphMERT also generates novel tails, predicting tokens from the dataset vocabulary that are absent in
the seed KG (see an example given in Table C1 in Appendix C).

6.2     Triple-level Evaluation

Next, we present results for triple-level evaluations.

6.2.1    FActScore* Results

We use two prompts to evaluate a triple based on:


                                                         29
Table 4: GraphMERT-extracted KG. Number of triples over extraction stages; similarity threshold β =
0.67. We show the number of triples after the helper LLM combines the tail tokens, next after discarding
tails hallucinated by the LLM, then after similarity filtering, and finally after dropping triple repetitions.

                                        Formed tails excluding
                      Formed tails                                  After β-filtering      Final: repetitions
         α value                          LLM hallucinated
                      (non-unique)                                   (non-unique)          dropped (unique)
                                            (non-unique)
         α = 0.55       1,760,088               1,536,581                 139,565              109,293

                          Table 5: FActScore* KG evaluation (in percentage points)

                 KG type             #triples     Context only      Context and General truth
                 LLM (baseline)       515,460           40.2                        48.1
                 GraphMERT            139,565           69.8                        72.2


     1. context only,
     2. context and model’s internal knowledge of general truth.

The first prompt includes the text in black only, the second prompt includes the text in black and teal:

 Prompt. You will evaluate the quality of triples for a medical knowledge graph on diabetes and its comorbidities.
 For each triple, you are given:
       • A sequence providing context
       • A head entity, a relation, and a tail entity
 Your task: Accept the triple (“[yes]”) or reject it (“[no]”) based on:
       • Logical alignment: the tail must logically align with the head and relation; relation must match entity
         types.
       • Context support: the sequence should support the triple. Allow statements that are factual and
         general truth, even if not perfectly aligned with context, but still avoid contradictions. If the triple has
         no reliable support, reject the triple.
       • Knowledge value: the triple must add new, medically meaningful information to the graph.
 Output only “[yes]” or “[no]” as your final judgment. Wrap your reasoning in <think>...</think>.

Table 5 reports the FActScore* of GraphMERT KG versus the LLM KG using Qwen3-32B as the validator.
We conduct two variants of the evaluation, differing only in an extra accept condition in the prompt: 1)
based on context only, closely following the original FActScore, and 2) based on context + model’s internal
knowledge, which additionally accepts triples that express general truths even if not explicitly stated in
the context. Variant (2) acknowledges cross-dataset concept linking, whereas (1) restricts evidence to the
local context. Because the same triple can originate from multiple sequences, some triples are checked more
than once against different texts. As a result, the reported number of triples exceeds the count in the final
deduplicated KGs. We also score the seed KG with respect to the sequences into which its triples are injected.
In this setting, FActScore primarily reflects the injection relevance.

Why are LLM KG FActScores so low? Surprisingly, the LLM KG scores poorly even when validated by
the same model (Qwen3-32B), which flags many of its own errors. This underscores weak prompt steerability:
Knowledge may exist in parameters, yet prompt-based generation fails to elicit correct, ontology-respecting
triples. Our analysis points to three recurring failure modes:

     1. Relation misinterpretation: The model maps relations by lexical similarity rather than ontological
        meaning, drawing on its internal knowledge.


                                                            30
                          Table 6: Validity check with Qwen3-32B (in percentage points)

                       KG type            # triples   yes (ValidityScore)     maybe      no
                       LLM (baseline)      515,460             43.0             24.1    31.4
                       UMLS Seed KG         28,533             53.4             10.0    34.7
                       GraphMERT           139,565             68.8             18.3    10.8



        2. Systematic malformed repetition: The same ill-formed triples reappear across different text chunks.

        3. Overlinking a head–tail pair: Multiple, largely invalid relations are assigned to the same entity pair.

Illustrative errors

        • Misinterpreted relation: ⟨diabetes, has_finding_site, urban area⟩. Here, “site” is treated as a lo-
          cation (anatomical structure is expected). Likewise, ⟨telehealth intervention, has_part, diabetes⟩
          misuses has_part to describe care; a correct variant: ⟨diabetes, focus_of, telehealth intervention⟩.

        • Overlinking (redundant relations):      For   ⟨obesity, diabetes⟩, the LLM   proposed
          is_modification_of, part_of, plays_role, cause_of, causative_agent_of, has_component,
          has_pathological_process. However, only associated_with is valid.

        • Spurious co-occurrence link: ⟨diabetes, has_method, mammography⟩. The entities merely co-
          occurred in an abstract; mammography is not used for diabetes, yet the LLM infers a spurious
          relation.

“Spurious co-occurrence link” illustrates a disadvantage of local KG extraction methods vs. global methods
that capture how concepts are distributed and connected across the full dataset. As a result, spurious links
between concepts that rarely co-occur remain weak and are less likely to be predicted.
Implication: Broad, pre-trained LLMs tend to project general associations into domain-specific relations,
yielding invalid triples. High-stakes domains benefit from compact, domain-tailored models and pipelines
that enforce ontology and provenance.

6.2.2     ValidityScore

Validity check on the whole KG with Qwen3-32B: To get a sense of the triple semantic quality of
GraphMERT- and LLM-extracted KGs, we conduct a validity check: Test the validity of each triple in the
graph with Qwen3-32B as the judge LLM.
Table 6 summarizes the validity checks across KGs. GraphMERT attains a markedly higher “yes” rate,
i.e., ValidityScore, than the LLM baseline (68.8% vs. 43.0%) with far fewer “no” judgments (10.8% vs.
31.4%), indicating substantially cleaner relation usage and predicate hygiene. Overall, the LLM KG is
less conservative (more details ahead) and less valid. The typical malformed triples are shown in Tables 7
(GraphMERT) and 8 (LLM).

Validity check on a KG subset with GPT-5: We also perform a validity check on small KG subsets
with GPT-5 (Thinking). GPT-5 is particularly strict in evaluating consistency of triples and whether the
relation is used in the correct direction, aligning with our goal of obtaining dependable judgments. We
retrieve 100 random triples across seven diabetes-related keywords: T2DM, hyperglycemia, dyslipidemia,
adiponectin, metformin, SGLT2, and CVD. Each triple is assigned a yes/maybe/no verdict (Fig. 12). The
keywords are drawn from the 2000-word dataset-level summary generated with Gemini 2.5 Pro, representing
some of the most frequent and clinically relevant terms related to diabetes and its comorbidities.
Overall, the GraphMERT KG consistently produces a higher proportion of valid (yes) triples and fewer
incorrect (no) triples across all keywords, whereas the LLM KG shows more relation misuse and ontology


                                                         31
                                                                                                           yes         maybe         no
          100

          80



Triples
          60

          40

          20

           0
                triglyceride     t2dm       hyperglycemia dyslipidemia adiponectin       metformin          sglt2          cvd
                G 52/26/22     G 60/26/14     G 43/43/14       G 59/30/11   G 41/44/15       G 34/60/6    G 60/27/13    G 60/33/7
                L 52/25/23     L 34/21/45     L 37/31/32       L 38/23/39   L 38/21/41       L 23/19/58   L 31/18/51    L 41/14/45
                                                                      Entities
                                                           Left bar = GLM, Right bar = LLM

Figure 12: Validity check with GPT-5 Thinking, 100 random triples per keyword. The keywords are lined on
the x-axis. Within each category, the left bars represent GraphMERT triples and right bars LLM triples.
The captions below the labels show yes/maybe/no split counts for GLM and LLM.

                       Table 7: GraphMERT-extracted KG triples: Malformed triple examples

  Triples with an incomplete tail                                                                 Comment
  CKD risk prediction model, associated_with, validated                                           adjectival tail
  gestational diabetes mellitus, associated_with, twin                                            should be twin pregnancy
  elastin, has_modification, carbam                                                               should be carbamylation
  Triples with overstated causality                                                               Comment
  insulin resistance in CKD, cause_of, metabolic syndrome                                         IR is a criterion
  insulin resistance in CKD, cause_of, vascular disorder                                          vague tail
  diabetes mellitus, cause_of, tuberculosis                                                       cause is mycobacterium; DM is
                                                                                                  risk
  Triples with vague tails                                                                        Comment
  blind patients with DM, associated_with, diabetic retinopathy                                   head is a cohort
  atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, associated_with, lifestyle                              vague tail
  Triples with predicate misuse                                                 Comment
  atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, has_causative_agent, apolipoprotein b should      be      apolipoprotein
                                                                                B–containing lipoproteins
  type 2 diabetes mellitus, associated_with, parasitic infection                weak/unspecific link
  glucocorticoid-induced hyperglycaemia, has_finding_site, tissue               wrong site (should be blood)



violations, reflected in a greater share of maybe and no verdicts. This highlights the more conservative but
domain-appropriate character of the GraphMERT KG compared to the noisier LLM KG. According to
verdicts (a very short reason why), the LLM often violates ontology, confusing methods with diseases, and
misuses relations, with the two errors reinforcing each other. Next, we analyze the main errors of each KG
separately.

GraphMERT: The main issues in GraphMERT triples are vagueness and incomplete tails, though they
remain domain-appropriate. Tail incompleteness arises when the helper LLM accepts an incomplete token
as a valid tail during token combination. We observe this effect across all helper LLMs we tested, including


                                                                      32
                      Table 8: LLM-extracted KG triples: Malformed triple examples

Triples with reversed relation                                 Comment
cryptogenic stroke, causative_agent_of, paradoxical embolism   reversed causality
ischemic stroke, cause_of, ps                                  PS — Protein S deficiency; reversed
glucocorticoids, has_part, steroidogenesis                     steroidogenesis produces GCs
Triples with predicate misuse                                  Comment
ischemic stroke, cause_of, telomere length                     biologically wrong
elastin, finding_site_of, vascular smooth muscle cell          cells aren’t “found” in elastin
CKD awareness, has_component, race/ethnicity                   CKD = chronic kidney disease; ontologically
                                                               wrong
lockdown, associated_with, bone mineral density                mismatches ontological types
elastin, has_pathological_process, matrix metalloproteinase    metalloproteinase is an enzyme
Triples with ill-defined target                                Comment
chronic kidney disease (CKD), cause_of, renal retinopathy      tail isn’t a standard retinal disorder term



Gemini Flash 2.0 and 2.5. Tail vagueness occurs when GraphMERT does not rank the required tail
tokens within its top-20 predictions; the helper LLM then stitches together a completion that is contextually
acceptable but semantically weak. This also explains most of the cases of overstated causality and predicate
misuse: missing key tokens required for high-quality tail completion, the LLM still attempts a plausible but
semantically weak completion. A practical mitigation is to exclude low-information 128-token sequences in
the prediction stage (e.g., segments dominated by measurements, dosages, or numbers). We currently do
not filter these sequences, which may contaminate the extracted KG.

LLM: In contrast, we observe that the LLM misinterprets UMLS biomedical relations and substitutes
them with its broader internal knowledge, resulting in approximations that violate the ontology. Designing
prompts to fully explain all relations is impractical. Our experiments show that even multiple examples fail
to steer the model consistently: It defaults to its own internal semantics. We also observe systematic relation
reversal, consistent with findings in (Berglund et al., 2024). More broadly, extracting well-formed triples
requires capturing semantic rather than syntactic representations, which is challenging for LLMs trained
primarily on surface text.

Examples: To exemplify the difference between GraphMERT and LLM KGs explicitly, for the same
prompt, we provide Tables C3, C4, C5, C6 with GPT-5 verdicts of triples sampled from GraphMERT-
extracted KG and LLM-extracted KG in Appendix C.

6.3   Graph-level Evaluation

To evaluate the extracted KG, we apply GraphRAG to the filtered benchmarks and assess accuracy based
on the model’s success rate in answering the questions. We compare the accuracy by using different KGs as
the primary source of information in response generation.
We evaluate GraphMERT KG against the baseline LLM KG on the filtered endocrinology subset of ICD-
Bench, reporting the average question-answering accuracy across three runs. The evaluation is stratified
by difficulty level, a label from the original benchmark. Our filtered test set includes 20 trivial questions
(corresponding to 1-hop QA), and a total of 49 questions across difficulty levels ranging from very easy to
very hard, based on the difficulty definitions from ICD-Bench. The detailed results are presented in Table 9.
We also test the KGs on public benchmarks, which are described in Appendix D. The findings demonstrate
that the GraphMERT KG consistently outperforms the baseline. Across the whole filtered subset, our
framework achieves an overall accuracy gain of 9.2% on ICD-Bench, and 1.7% to 3.7% gain on other medical
benchmarks. This highlights the advantages of the GraphMERT KG for downstream medical question-
answering tasks.


                                                        33
                                         Table 9: GraphRAG KG evaluation

        Difficulty            Trivial      Very     Easy        Medium        Hard             Very         Average
                                           Easy                                                Hard
        # Questions           20           26       8           6             2                7            69
        LLM KG (baseline)     56.7         68.0     33.3        38.9          0.0              9.5          50.2
        Seed KG               56.7         71.8     37.5        55.6          0.0              4.8          53.1
        GraphMERT             66.7         79.5     50.0        50.0          0.0              0.0          59.4


Table 10: GraphRAG accuracies for different α and β. Performance gain versus LLM KG is shown in
parentheses.

             α value   LLM KG           Seed KG    β = 0.62      β = 0.65           β = 0.67          β = 0.69
             0.50           58.0          51.7    55.1 (-2.9)   55.1 (-2.9)        54.6 (-3.4)            -
             0.53           55.1          51.2    60.4 (+5.3)   55.1 (+0.0)       58.9 (+3.8)             -
             0.55           50.2          53.1    57.5 (+7.3)   59.2 (+9.0)       59.4 (+9.2)        52.2 (+2.0)
             0.57           51.2          53.1    56.0 (+4.8)   54.6 (+3.4)       52.2 (+1.0)             -
             0.60           53.1          49.8    53.6 (+0.5)   52.7 (-0.4)       53.6 (+0.5)             -



6.4     Ablations

To validate our design choices and understand the contribution of different components, we conduct a series
of ablation studies. We analyze the sensitivity of GraphMERT to its core hyperparameters, its robustness
to the density of the seed KG, and the effect of similarity and fact-checking.

6.4.1     Training GraphMERT with Less-relevant Injections

Our framework relies on two key similarity thresholds: the injection threshold α, which determines the
relevance threshold of seed triples used for training, and the acceptance threshold β, which filters the final
triples generated by the pipeline. To find the optimal configuration, we perform a grid search over a range
of values for both parameters.
Hyperparameter α controls the trade-off between the quality and quantity of knowledge injected during
training. A higher α imposes a stricter relevance filter, ensuring high-quality injections but limiting their
volume and diversity. Hyperparameter β serves as a grounding function for the final triples on the source
sentence. The baseline LLM KG is filtered in each experiment to include only the relations available for the
corresponding α value, ensuring an equitable evaluation.
The results are presented in Figure 13. We observe that performance peaks at α = 0.55 and β = 0.67. Lower
α’s likely introduce noisy, contextually irrelevant triples that degrade performance. Conversely, higher α’s
appear overly restrictive, preventing the model from leveraging a sufficient breadth of knowledge. In addition,
β = 0.67 gives good results, underscoring the importance of a final quality check on generated triples. A
higher optimal β strengthens the importance of cross-document understanding for triple generation, which
is not possible in LLM-generated KGs. The optimal configuration achieves a 9.2% improvement over the
baseline LLM KG.

6.4.2     Training GraphMERT with a Smaller Seed KG

To evaluate the dependency of GraphMERT on the density of provided knowledge, we conduct an ex-
periment to measure its performance with a sparser seed KG. A robust system should be able to function
effectively even when the initial knowledge base is incomplete.
Using the optimal hyperparameters identified previously (α = 0.55 and β = 0.67), we simulate varying levels
of knowledge sparsity by randomly removing 25%, 50%, and 75% of the triples from the original seed KG
before executing our pipeline.


                                                           34
Figure 13: GraphRAG accuracies for different α and β. Bubble size corresponds to absolute accuracy and
color indicates the accuracy gain relative to the LLM KG baseline (red denotes positive gain, blue denotes
negative gain).

Table 11: GraphRAG accuracies upon dropping part of the seed KG. Performance gain versus LLM KG is
shown in the last column.

              KG type                                  GraphRAG accuracy        Gap vs. LLM KG
              GraphMERT                                         59.4                    +9.2
              GraphMERT (remove 25% of seed KG)                 54.6                    +4.4
              GraphMERT (remove 50% of seed KG)                 56.5                    +6.3
              GraphMERT (remove 75% of seed KG)                 54.1                    +3.9



The results, shown in Table 11, indicate that while performance generally decreases as the seed KG becomes
sparser, our framework remains effective. Even with 75% of the seed knowledge removed, GraphMERT
still outperforms the baseline LLM KG by 3.86%. This finding highlights the robustness of our approach,
demonstrating that it can effectively leverage even a sparse set of seed triples to generate a high-quality KG.

6.4.3     Ablating GraphMERT Components

Next, we ablate architectural components and the training objective:

No-span MLM/MNM: Replace the span masking objective with a simple one-token MLM/MNM masking
      objective.

No H-GAT: Switch off graph attention. This implies training without relation embeddings; the model
      predictions are purely syntactic.

No dropout: Switch off dropout on relation embeddings.

Before discussing the ablation results, we outline the main observations for each one:

        • In the “no H-GAT” ablation, we observe a large number of irrelevant tokens in the top-k predicted
          tokens, with commas and articles being primarily predicted in the top 3. This is supported by findings
          by García-Silva et al. (2023): They attempted to complete triples with top-k tokens extracted from


                                                        35
                  Table 12: GraphRAG accuracies when ablating GraphMERT features

     KG type                                Trivial Very         Easy     Medium Hard        Very   Average
                                                    Easy                                     Hard
     GraphMERT                              66.7       79.5      50.0     50.0        0.0    0.0    59.4
     GraphMERT (no-span MLM/MNM)            66.7       76.9      29.2     61.1        0.0    9.5    58.0
     GraphMERT (no H-GAT)                   65.0       68.0      33.3     55.6        0.0    0.0    53.1
     GraphMERT (no dropout)                 56.7       65.4      45.8     50.0        0.0    14.3   52.2


    Table 13: FActScore* KG evaluation (in percentage points) when ablating GraphMERT features

      KG type                               #triples        Context only         Context and General truth
      GraphMERT                              139,565             69.8                       72.2
      GraphMERT (no-span MLM/MNM)            188,211              69.0                      72.2
      GraphMERT (no H-GAT)                   167,443              68.3                      70.0
      GraphMERT (no dropout)                 149,952              68.9                      70.9


 Table 14: Validity check with Qwen3-32B (in percentage points) when ablating GraphMERT features

                  KG type                                     # triples    yes     maybe     no
                  GraphMERT                                    139,565    68.8       18.3   10.8
                  GraphMERT (no-span MLM/MNM)                  188,211    69.4       18.1   10.2
                  GraphMERT (no dropout)                       149,952    66.5       19.2   12.0
                  GraphMERT (no H-GAT)                         167,443    68.2       17.2   12.2



        the BERT model in a purely syntactic manner, and had to rely on a stop word list to make the
        results usable.

     • Disabling dropout leads to overfitting on the seed KG vocabulary; hence, less diverse tails.

     • Training with a no-span MLM/MNM objective produces simpler tail completions (1–2 tokens long),
       because each individual candidate is not well aligned with the others.

Table 12 demonstrates that the full GraphMERT KG configuration achieves the highest performance.
While the full model achieves the best results, the variant without span-masking performs only slightly
worse. In contrast, the removal of either dropout or H-GAT leads to a substantial decrease in accuracy,
underscoring their importance for robust performance.
Table 13 demonstrates that the full model FActScore* is the highest: removing dropout or H-GAT lowers
acceptance and increases rejections. GraphMERT without span-masking reaches the same FActScore* in
“Context and General truth” case.
GraphMERT without span-masking achieves the best acceptance (69.4% yes, 10.2% no) (Table 14), but,
according to GraphRAG, the KG remains less informative overall. In effect, the KG obtained from this
variant tends to be populated with trivially correct tiples, i.e., ⟨diabetes, is_a, disease⟩. This leads to a
higher rate of successful tail completion: 188k against 140k with span masking. Such short, obvious facts
pass a validity check, manifesting in a higher ValidityScore. However, this simplicity comes at a cost: No-
span-masked completions lack the nuance and granularity provided by span masking, resulting in poorer
coverage and a loss of fine-grained domain details. This trade-off stresses the importance of evaluating KGs
both at the graph and triple levels. We advise employing token-level MLM/MNM when the simplicity of
triples is not a limitation.


                                                       36
7   Discussion, Limitations, and Future work

Discussion: Our results show that GraphMERT yields higher factuality and validity of triples than LLM-
based KG extraction while preserving ontology fidelity. We observe a consistent difference between Graph-
MERT and LLM KGs in relation usage and predicate hygiene. GraphMERT generally employs relations
correctly, aligns tails with heads, and preserves biomedical categories (diseases, syndromes, complications).
The LLM KG often misuses or reverses the direction of relations, mixes categories in ontology-violating ways
(e.g., socio-economic with biomedical), and produces inverse/ill-typed statements. The GraphMERT KG
has far fewer ontology violations and hews closer to UMLS. The GraphMERT KG vocabulary is more
conservative: The conservativenss can be explained based on the limited scope of the seed KG’s vocabulary
and its tendency to restate head tokens (mimicking UMLS’s tautological triples).
We attribute the difference in factuality and validity of triples to the usage of semantic relation embeddings,
which move predictions toward ontology-aligned ones. Triple-level error analysis shows GraphMERT may
sometimes extract incomplete and vague but often domain-appropriate tails with factual relations, whereas
LLMs usually produce diverse tails but frequently misuse or reverse the direction of relations. Our graph-
level evaluation may conflate the KG signal with backbone model knowledge under GraphRAG; future work
will include graph-level metrics that isolate the contribution of KGs as well as relation-aware retrieval.

Limitations: The main limitation of GraphMERT is its reliance on the seed KG. First, running the
framework requires a high-quality seed with 100–1000 examples per relation. Second, once training is com-
plete, the relation set is fixed. Hence, adding new relations requires retraining. A further limitation is its
dependence on a helper LLM for tail combination, which introduces occasional incompleteness in the ex-
tracted triple tails. As a neural model, GraphMERT also tends to prioritize frequent entities, potentially
overlooking rare but meaningful ones. In addition, we did not evaluate the model’s ability to predict or
handle numerical tokens, which remains an open direction for future work. Finally, its robustness to unseen
entities remains untested; extracting entirely novel concepts from new texts would likely require fine-tuning,
limiting adaptability in fast-changing domains.

Future work: We plan to improve the KG quality by unifying entity spellings, replacing the fixed top-k
limit with high-probability token selection. We aim to extend GraphMERT to direct multi-token span
prediction in the semantic space, reducing reliance on the helper LLM for tail token combining. Further, we
plan to conduct more rigorous graph-level evaluations, since GraphRAG alone often blends KG information
with model knowledge, and does not guarantee retrieval of the most relevant subgraph, as its retrieval is
entity-guided and relations play only a secondary role. It may also be valuable to investigate how the
GraphMERT evaluation loss correlates with the quality of the extracted KGs. We also plan to extract
KGs in other domains and employ them in various downstream applications.

8   Conclusion

We proposed a new framework for automatically extracting domain-specific KGs from unstructured, sentence-
level text. Central to this work is our idea of encoding both semantic and syntactic information into textual
chain graphs, a new representation we introduced. To operate in this space, we presented GraphMERT,
a transformer-based model that unifies an encoder-only architecture with graph attention. Together, these
contributions enable the distillation of explicit semantic structures from trained neural networks, bridging
neural and symbolic representations and advancing interpretable, reliable KG construction.
We also outlined KG-powered applications, underscoring that future progress hinges on reliable, factual
KGs and other high-level explicit abstractions that embody collective knowledge while remaining compatible
with AI inference and downstream tasks. We argue that neural-KG integration is a key step toward domain-
specific superintelligence. Looking ahead, we foresee the research community embracing the neurosymbolic
paradigm, where explicit, auditable, and evolving KGs complement neural inference that is approximate,
efficient, and capable of handling ambiguity.

Acknowledgment: This work was supported by NSF under Grant No. CNS-2216746.


                                                      37
References
Titipat Achakulvisut, Daniel Acuna, and Konrad Kording. Pubmed parser: A Python parser for PubMed
  open-access XML subset and MEDLINE XML dataset. Journal of Open Source Software, 5(46):1979,
  2020.

Kian Ahrabian, Xinwei Du, Richard Delwin Myloth, Arun Baalaaji Sankar Ananthan, and Jay Pujara.
  PubGraph: A large-scale scientific knowledge graph, 2023. arXiv:2302.02231 [cs.AI].

Ekin Akyurek, Tolga Bolukbasi, Frederick Liu, Binbin Xiong, Ian Tenney, Jacob Andreas, and Kelvin Guu.
  Towards tracing knowledge in language models back to the training data, December 2022. In Findings of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022.

Laith Alzubaidi, Aiman Al-Sabaawi, Jinshuai Bai, Ammar Dukhan, Ahmed H. Alkenani, Ahmed Al-Asadi,
  Haider A. Alwzwazy, Mohamed Manoufali, Mohammed A. Fadhel, A. S. Albahri, Catarina Moreira,
  Chun Ouyang, Jinglan Zhang, Jose Santamaría, Asma Salhi, Freek Hollman, Ashish Gupta, Ye Duan,
  Timon Rabczuk, Amin Abbosh, and Yuantong Gu. Towards risk-free trustworthy artificial intelligence:
  Significance and requirements. International Journal of Intelligent Systems, 2023(1):4459198, 2023. doi:
  10.1155/2023/4459198.

Chenxin An, Jun Zhang, Ming Zhong, Lei Li, Shansan Gong, Yao Luo, Jingjing Xu, and Lingpeng Kong.
  Why does the effective context length of LLMs fall short?, 2024. arXiv:2410.18745 [cs.CL].

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to
  align and translate, 2016. arXiv:1409.0473 [cs.CL].

Lukas Berglund, Meg Tong, Max Kaufmann, Mikita Balesni, Asa Cooper Stickland, Tomasz Korbak, and
  Owain Evans. The reversal curse: LLMs trained on “A is B" fail to learn “B is A", 2024. arXiv:2309.12288
  [cs.CL].

Tarek R. Besold, Artur d’Avila Garcez, Sebastian Bader, Howard Bowman, Pedro Domingos, Pascal Hitzler,
  Kai-Uwe Kuehnberger, Luis C. Lamb, Daniel Lowd, Priscila Machado Vieira Lima, Leo de Penning, Gadi
  Pinkas, Hoifung Poon, and Gerson Zaverucha. Neural-symbolic learning and reasoning: A survey and
  interpretation, 2017. arXiv:1711.03902 [cs.AI].

Olivier Bodenreider. The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS): Integrating biomedical terminology.
  Nucleic Acids Research, 32:267–270, 2004.

Nick Bostrom. Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies. 2014.

Samuel R. Bowman. Eight things to know about large language models, 2023. arXiv:2304.00612 [cs.CL].

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D. Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
  Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
  Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens
  Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark,
  Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models
  are few-shot learners, 2020. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.

Boxi Cao, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, Le Sun, Lingyong Yan, Meng Liao, Tong Xue, and Jin Xu. Knowl-
  edgeable or educated guess? Revisiting language models as knowledge bases, August 2021. In Proceedings
  of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
  Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers).

Salvatore Carta, Alessandro Giuliani, Leonardo Piano, Alessandro Sebastian Podda, Livio Pompianu, and
  Sandro Gabriele Tiddia. Iterative zero-shot LLM prompting for knowledge graph construction, 2023.
  arXiv:2307.01128 [cs.CL].


                                                   38
Souradip Chakraborty, Ekaba Bisong, Shweta Bhatt, Thomas Wagner, Riley Elliott, and Francesco Mosconi.
  BioMedBERT: A pre-trained biomedical language model for QA and IR, December 2020. In Proceedings
  of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics.

Hoyeon Chang, Jinho Park, Seonghyeon Ye, Sohee Yang, Youngkyung Seo, Du-Seong Chang, and Minjoon
  Seo. How do large language models acquire factual knowledge during pretraining?, 2025. In Proceedings
  of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.

Hanzhu Chen, Xu Shen, Qitan Lv, Jie Wang, Xiaoqi Ni, and Jieping Ye. SAC-KG: Exploiting large language
  models as skilled automatic constructors for domain knowledge graph, August 2024. In Proceedings of the
  62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers).

Hao Chen, Yiming Zhang, Qi Zhang, Hantao Yang, Xiaomeng Hu, Xuetao Ma, Yifan Yanggong, and Junbo
  Zhao. Maybe only 0.5% data is needed: A preliminary exploration of low training data instruction tuning,
  2023a. arXiv:2305.09246 [cs.AI].

Mingyang Chen, Wen Zhang, Yuxia Geng, Zezhong Xu, Jeff Z. Pan, and Huajun Chen. Generalizing to
 unseen elements: a survey on knowledge extrapolation for knowledge graphs, 2023b. In Proceedings of the
 Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

Zhisong Chen and Ching Y. Suen. Measuring the complexity of rule-based expert systems. Expert Systems
  with Applications, 7(4):467–481, 1994. ISSN 0957-4174. doi: 10.1016/0957-4174(94)90072-8.

Kewei Cheng, Nesreen K. Ahmed, Ryan A. Rossi, Theodore Willke, and Yizhou Sun. Neural-symbolic
 methods for knowledge graph reasoning: A survey. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from
 Data, 18(9), November 2024. ISSN 1556-4681. doi: 10.1145/3686806.

Alain Colmerauer and Philippe Roussel. The birth of Prolog, pp. 331–367. 1996. ISBN 0201895021. doi:
  10.1145/234286.1057820.

Artur d’Avila Garcez, Marco Gori, Luis C. Lamb, Luciano Serafini, Michael Spranger, and Son N. Tran.
  Neural-symbolic computing: An effective methodology for principled integration of machine learning and
  reasoning, 2019. arXiv:1905.06088 [cs.AI].

Artur S. d’Avila Garcez, Krysia B. Broda, and Dov. M. Gabbay. Introduction and Overview. 2002. ISBN
  978-1-4471-0211-3. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4471-0211-3_1. In Foundations and Applications.

Bhishma Dedhia, Yuval Kansal, and Niraj K. Jha. Bottom-up domain-specific superintelligence: A reliable
  knowledge graph is what we need, 2025. arXiv:2507.13966 [cs.CL].

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirec-
  tional transformers for language understanding, 2019. arXiv:1810.04805 [cs.CL].

Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Spurious correlations in reference-free evaluation
  of text generation, 2022. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers).

Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt, and
 Jonathan Larson. From local to global: A graph RAG approach to query-focused summarization, 2024.
 arXiv:2404.16130 [cs.CL].

Wenqi Fan, Yujuan Ding, Liangbo Ning, Shijie Wang, Hengyun Li, Dawei Yin, Tat-Seng Chua, and Qing
 Li. A survey on RAG meeting LLMs: Towards retrieval-augmented large language models, 2024. In
 Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.

Saumya Gandhi, Ritu Gala, Vijay Viswanathan, Tongshuang Wu, and Graham Neubig. Better synthetic
  data by retrieving and transforming existing datasets, August 2024. In Findings of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024.


                                                   39
Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, Meng
  Wang, and Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey, 2024.
  arXiv:2312.10997 [cs.CL].

Artur d’Avila Garcez and Luís C. Lamb. Neurosymbolic AI: The 3rd wave. Artificial Intelligence Review,
  56(11):12387–12406, March 2023. ISSN 0269-2821. doi: 10.1007/s10462-023-10448-w.

Andrés García-Silva, Cristian Berrío, and Jose Manuel Gómez-Pérez. Textual entailment for effective triple
 validation in object prediction, 2023. In The Semantic Web – ISWC 2023.

R. Stuart Geiger, Kevin Yu, Yanlai Yang, Mindy Dai, Jie Qiu, Rebekah Tang, and Jenny Huang. Garbage
  in, garbage out? Do machine learning application papers in social computing report where human-labeled
  training data comes from?, 2020. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
  Transparency.

Hatem Ghanem and Carlos Cruz. Fine-tuning or prompting on LLMs: Evaluating knowledge graph con-
  struction task. Frontiers in Big Data, 8:1505877, June 2025. doi: 10.3389/fdata.2025.1505877.

Bishwamittra Ghosh, Sarah Hasan, Naheed Anjum Arafat, and Arijit Khan. Logical consistency of large
  language models in fact-checking, 2025. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on
  Learning Representations.

Rajan Gupta, Gaurav Pandey, and Saibal Kumar Pal. Automating government report generation: A gener-
 ative AI approach for efficient data extraction, analysis, and visualization. Digital Government: Research
 and Practice, 6(1), February 2025. doi: 10.1145/3691352.

Lovisa Hagström, Denitsa Saynova, Tobias Norlund, Moa Johansson, and Richard Johansson. The effect of
  scaling, retrieval augmentation and form on the factual consistency of language models, December 2023.
  In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.

Stevan Harnad. The symbol grounding problem. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 42(1):335–346, 1990.
  ISSN 0167-2789. doi: 10.1016/0167-2789(90)90087-6.

John Haugeland. Artificial Intelligence: The Very Idea. 1985.

Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. Gaussian error linear units (GELUs), 2023. arXiv:1606.08415 [cs.LG].

Pascal Hitzler, Aaron Eberhart, Monireh Ebrahimi, Md Kamruzzaman Sarker, and Lu Zhou. Neuro-symbolic
  approaches in artificial intelligence. National Science Review, 9(6):nwac035, 2022. ISSN 2095-5138. doi:
  10.1093/nsr/nwac035.

Marvin Hofer, Daniel Obraczka, Alieh Saeedi, Hanna Köpcke, and Erhard Rahm. Construction of
 knowledge graphs: Current state and challenges. Information, 15(8), 2024. ISSN 2078-2489. doi:
 10.3390/info15080509.

Jiri Hron, Laura A. Culp, Gamaleldin Fathy Elsayed, Rosanne Liu, Jasper Snoek, Simon Kornblith, Alex
   Rizkowsky, Isabelle Simpson, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Noah Fiedel, Aaron T. Parisi, Alexander A. Alemi,
   Azade Nova, Ben Adlam, Bernd Bohnet, Gaurav Mishra, Hanie Sedghi, Izzeddin Gur, Jaehoon Lee,
   John D. Co-Reyes, Kathleen Kenealy, Kelvin Xu, Kevin Swersky, Igor Mordatch, Lechao Xiao, Maxwell
   Bileschi, Peter J. Liu, Roman Novak, Sharad Vikram, Tris Warkentin, and Jeffrey Pennington. Training
   language models on the knowledge graph: Insights on hallucinations and their detectability, 2024. In
   Proceedings of the First Conference on Language Modeling.

Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and
  Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models, 2022. In Proceedings of the Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations.

Haoyu Huang, Chong Chen, Zeang Sheng, Yang Li, and Wentao Zhang. Can LLMs be good graph judge for
  knowledge graph construction?, 2025a. arXiv:2411.17388 [cs.CL].


                                                    40
Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong Chen,
  Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. A survey on hallucination in large language
  models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions. ACM Transactions on Information Systems,
  43(2):1–55, January 2025b. ISSN 1558-2868. doi: 10.1145/3703155.

N. Ibrahim, S. Aboulela, A. Ibrahim, et al. A survey on augmenting knowledge graphs (KGs) with large
  language models (LLMs): Models, evaluation metrics, benchmarks, and challenges. Discover Artificial
  Intelligence, 4(1):76, 2024. doi: 10.1007/s44163-024-00175-8.

Shadi Iskander, Sofia Tolmach, Ori Shapira, Nachshon Cohen, and Zohar Karnin. Quality matters: Evalu-
  ating synthetic data for tool-using LLMs, November 2024. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing.

Mohamed Yahya Jaradeh, Kuldeep Singh, Markus Stocker, Andreas Both, and Sören Auer. Information
 extraction pipelines for knowledge graphs. Knowledge and Information Systems, 65(5):1989–2016, 2023.
 ISSN 0219-1377. doi: 10.1007/s10115-022-01826-x.

Shaoxiong Ji, Shirui Pan, Erik Cambria, Pekka Marttinen, and Philip S. Yu. A survey on knowledge graphs:
  Representation, acquisition, and applications. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Sys-
  tems, 33(2):494–514, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3070843.

Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang, Andrea
  Madotto, and Pascale Fung. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM Computing
  Surveys, 55(12), March 2023. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3571730.

Jiajie Jin, Yutao Zhu, Yujia Zhou, and Zhicheng Dou. BIDER: Bridging knowledge inconsistency for efficient
  retrieval-augmented LLMs via key supporting evidence, August 2024. In Findings of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024.

Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Yinhan Liu, Daniel S. Weld, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Omer Levy. SpanBERT:
 Improving pre-training by representing and predicting spans. Transactions of the Association for Compu-
 tational Linguistics, 8:64–77, 2020. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00300.

Tal Kadosh, Niranjan Hasabnis, Vy A. Vo, Nadav Schneider, Neva Krien, Mihai Capotă, Abdul Wasay,
  Guy Tamir, Ted Willke, Nesreen Ahmed, Yuval Pinter, Timothy Mattson, and Gal Oren. MonoCoder:
  Domain-specific code language model for HPC codes and tasks, 2024. In Proceedings of the IEEE High
  Performance Extreme Computing Conference.

Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
  Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models, 2020.
  arXiv:2001.08361 [cs.LG].

Muhammad Khalifa, David Wadden, Emma Strubell, Honglak Lee, Lu Wang, Iz Beltagy, and Hao Peng.
 Source-aware training enables knowledge attribution in language models, 2024. arXiv:2404.01019 [cs.CL].

Yubin Kim, Hyewon Jeong, Shan Chen, Shuyue Stella Li, Mingyu Lu, Kumail Alhamoud, Jimin Mun,
  Cristina Grau, Minseok Jung, Rodrigo Gameiro, Lizhou Fan, Eugene Park, Tristan Lin, Joonsik Yoon,
  Wonjin Yoon, Maarten Sap, Yulia Tsvetkov, Paul Liang, Xuhai Xu, Xin Liu, Daniel McDuff, Hyeonhoon
  Lee, Hae Won Park, Samir Tulebaev, and Cynthia Breazeal. Medical hallucinations in foundation models
  and their impact on healthcare, 2025. arXiv:2503.05777 [cs.CL].

Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional
  neural networks, 2012. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.

Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553):436–444, 2015. ISSN
  1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature14539.


                                                   41
Junyi Li, Jie Chen, Ruiyang Ren, Xiaoxue Cheng, Xin Zhao, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen. The dawn
  after the dark: An empirical study on factuality hallucination in large language models, August 2024.
  In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
  Long Papers).

Linyang Li, Ruotian Ma, Qipeng Guo, Xiangyang Xue, and Xipeng Qiu. BERT-ATTACK: Adversarial
  attack against BERT using BERT, November 2020. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).

Mingchen Li, Halil Kilicoglu, Hua Xu, and Rui Zhang. BiomedRAG: A retrieval augmented large language
 model for biomedicine. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 162:104769, 2025. ISSN 1532-0464. doi:
 10.1016/j.jbi.2024.104769.

Seunguook Lim and Jihie Kim. SapBERT: Speaker-aware pretrained BERT for emotion recognition in
  conversation. Algorithms, 16(1):8, 2022.

Robert K. Lindsay, Bruce G. Buchanan, Edward A. Feigenbaum, and Joshua Lederberg. DENDRAL: A case
  study of the first expert system for scientific hypothesis formation. Artificial Intelligence, 61(2):209–261,
  1993. ISSN 0004-3702. doi: 10.1016/0004-3702(93)90068-M.

Chuang Liu, Zelin Yao, Yibing Zhan, Xueqi Ma, Shirui Pan, and Wenbin Hu. Gradformer: Graph transformer
  with exponential decay, 2024a. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence.

Y. Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, M. Lewis, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach, 2019.
  arXiv:1907.11692 [cs.CL].

Yang Liu, Jiahuan Cao, Chongyu Liu, Kai Ding, and Lianwen Jin. Datasets for large language models: A
  comprehensive survey, 2024b. arXiv:2402.18041 [cs.CL].

Yushan Liu, Marcel Hildebrandt, Mitchell Joblin, Martin Ringsquandl, Rime Raissouni, and Volker Tresp.
  Neural multi-hop reasoning with logical rules on biomedical knowledge graphs, 2021. In The Semantic
  Web.

Xinyu Lu, Lifang Wang, Zejun Jiang, Shizhong Liu, and Jiashi Lin. MRE: A translational knowledge graph
  completion model based on multiple relation embedding. Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering, 20
  (3):5881–5900, 2023. ISSN 1551-0018. doi: 10.3934/mbe.2023253.

Linhao Luo, Yuan-Fang Li, Gholamreza Haffari, and Shirui Pan. Reasoning on graphs: Faithful and inter-
  pretable large language model reasoning, 2024. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
  Representations.

Andreas Madsen, Sarath Chandar, and Siva Reddy. Are self-explanations from large language models
 faithful?, August 2024. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024.

Gary Marcus. Deep learning: A critical appraisal, 2018. arXiv:1801.00631 [cs.AI].

John McCarthy. Circumscription—a form of non-monotonic reasoning. Artificial Intelligence, 13(1):27–39,
  1980. ISSN 0004-3702. doi: 10.1016/0004-3702(80)90011-9. Special Issue on Non-Monotonic Logic.

Dhruv Mehrotra and Tim Marchman. Perplexity is a bullshit machine, 2024. URL https://www.wired.
 com/story/perplexity-is-a-bullshit-machine/. WIRED, investigation documenting data scraping
 and multiple hallucinations/misattributions.

Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis, Wen-Tau Yih, Pang Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke Zettle-
  moyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. FActScore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual precision in long
  form text generation, December 2023. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing.


                                                      42
Shervin Minaee, Tomas Mikolov, Narjes Nikzad, Meysam Chenaghlu, Richard Socher, Xavier Amatriain,
  and Jianfeng Gao. Large language models: A survey, 2025. arXiv:2402.06196 [cs.CL].
Prakamya Mishra, Zonghai Yao, Parth Vashisht, Feiyun Ouyang, Beining Wang, Vidhi Dhaval Mody, and
  Hong Yu. SYNFAC-EDIT: Synthetic imitation edit feedback for factual alignment in clinical summa-
  rization, November 2024. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing.
Seyed Mahed Mousavi, Simone Alghisi, and Giuseppe Riccardi. DyKnow: Dynamically verifying time-
  sensitive factual knowledge in LLMs, November 2024. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: EMNLP 2024.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse,
  Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou, Gretchen
  Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin Chess, and John Schulman. WebGPT: Browser-
  assisted question-answering with human feedback, 2022. arXiv:2112.09332 [cs.CL].
Deepak Nathani, Jatin Chauhan, Charu Sharma, and Manohar Kaul. Learning attention-based embeddings
  for relation prediction in knowledge graphs, 2019. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics.
Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon. Computer science as empirical inquiry: Symbols and search. Commu-
  nications of the ACM, 19(3):113–126, March 1976. ISSN 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/360018.360022.
Thuat Nguyen, Chien Van Nguyen, Viet Dac Lai, Hieu Man, Nghia Trung Ngo, Franck Dernoncourt, Ryan A.
  Rossi, and Thien Huu Nguyen. CulturaX: A cleaned, enormous, and multilingual dataset for large language
  models in 167 languages, May 2024. In Proceedings of the Joint International Conference on Computational
  Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation.
Jeff Z. Pan, Simon Razniewski, Jan-Christoph Kalo, Sneha Singhania, Jiaoyan Chen, Stefan Dietze, Hajira
  Jabeen, Janna Omeliyanenko, Wen Zhang, Matteo Lissandrini, Russa Biswas, Gerard de Melo, Angela
  Bonifati, Edlira Vakaj, Mauro Dragoni, and Damien Graux. Large language models and knowledge graphs:
  Opportunities and challenges. Transactions on Graph Data and Knowledge, 1(1):2:1–2:38, 2023a. doi:
  10.4230/TGDK.1.1.2.
Shirui Pan, Linhao Luo, Yufei Wang, Chen Chen, Jiapu Wang, and Xindong Wu. Unifying large language
  models and knowledge graphs: A roadmap. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 36:
  3580–3599, 2023b.
Mayana Pereira, Sikha Pentyala, Anderson Nascimento, Rafael T. de Sousa Jr., and Martine De Cock. Secure
 multiparty computation for synthetic data generation from distributed data, 2022. arXiv:2210.07332
 [cs.CR].
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, and Alexan-
  der Miller. Language models as knowledge bases?, 2019. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
  Language Processing.
Ori Ram, Yoav Levine, Itay Dalmedigos, Dor Muhlgay, Amnon Shashua, Kevin Leyton-Brown, and Yoav
  Shoham. In-context retrieval-augmented language models. Transactions of the Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics, 11:1316–1331, 2023.
Qiang Rao and Tiejun Wang. Semantic enhancement based knowledge graph completion for graph convo-
  lutional neural networks, 2023. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Electrical, Mechanical
  and Computer Engineering.
Rohan Rao, Benika Hall, Sunil Patel, Christopher Brissette, and Gordana Neskovic. Insights, techniques, and
  evaluation for LLM-driven knowledge graphs, December 2024. URL https://developer.nvidia.com/
  blog/insights-techniques-and-evaluation-for-llm-driven-knowledge-graphs/. [Online; pub-
  lished Dec. 16, 2024; last accessed 26 Jul, 2025].


                                                    43
Rick Rejeleene, Xiaowei Xu, and John Talburt. Towards trustable language models: Investigating information
  quality of large language models, 2024. arXiv:2401.13086 [cs.CL].

Cynthia Rudin. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use in-
  terpretable models instead. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(5):206–215, 2019. ISSN 2522-5839. doi:
  10.1038/s42256-019-0048-x.

Bhaskarjit Sarmah, Benika Hall, Rohan Rao, Sunil Patel, Stefano Pasquali, and Dhagash Mehta. Hy-
  bridRAG: Integrating knowledge graphs and vector retrieval augmented generation for efficient information
  extraction, 2024. arXiv:2408.04948 [cs.CL].

Lee Sharkey, Bilal Chughtai, Joshua Batson, Jack Lindsey, Jeff Wu, Lucius Bushnaq, Nicholas Goldowsky-
  Dill, Stefan Heimersheim, Alejandro Ortega, Joseph Bloom, et al. Open problems in mechanistic inter-
  pretability, 2025. arXiv:2501.16496 [cs.AI].

Jude W. Shavlik, Raymond J. Mooney, and Geoffrey G. Towell. Symbolic and neural learning algorithms:
  An experimental comparison. Machine Learning, 6(2):111–143, 1991.

Fobo Shi, Duantengchuan Li, Xiaoguang Wang, Bing Li, and Xindong Wu. TGformer: A graph transformer
  framework for knowledge graph embedding. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 37
  (1):526–541, 2025. doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3486747.

Kurt Shuster, Spencer Poff, Moya Chen, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. Retrieval augmentation reduces
 hallucination in conversation, November 2021. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
 tics: EMNLP 2021.

Nianwen Si, Hao Zhang, Heyu Chang, Wenlin Zhang, Dan Qu, and Weiqiang Zhang. Knowledge unlearning
  for LLMs: Tasks, methods, and challenges, 2023. arXiv:2311.15766 [cs.CL].

Amit Singhal. Introducing the knowledge graph: Things, not strings. Google The Keyword Blog, May 2012.
 URL https://blog.google/products/search/introducing-knowledge-graph-things-not/. [Online;
 accessed 1-Aug-2025].

Richard Sutton. The bitter lesson. Incomplete Ideas (blog), 13(1):38, 2019.

Vinitra Swamy, Angelika Romanou, and Martin Jaggi. Interpreting language models through knowledge
  graph extraction, 2021. arXiv:2111.08546 [cs.LG].

Konrad Szocik, Bartłomiej Tkacz, and Patryk Gulczyński. The revelation of superintelligence. AI & Society,
  35(3):755–758, September 2020. ISSN 1435-5655. doi: 10.1007/s00146-020-00947-7.

A. J. Thirunavukarasu, D. S. J. Ting, K. Elangovan, L. Gutierrez, T. F. Tan, and D. S. W. Ting. Large
  language models in medicine. Nature Medicine, 29:1930–1940, 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02448-8.

Bozhong Tian, Xiaozhuan Liang, Siyuan Cheng, Qingbin Liu, Mengru Wang, Dianbo Sui, Xi Chen, Huajun
  Chen, and Ningyu Zhang. To forget or not? Towards practical knowledge unlearning for large language
  models, November 2024. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024.

Geoffrey G. Towell. Using neural networks. Machine Learning: A Multistrategy Approach, Volume IV, 4:
 405, 1994.

Son Tran, Edjard Mota, and Artur d’Avila Garcez. Reasoning in neurosymbolic AI, 2025. arXiv:2505.20313
  [cs.AI].

Md Shahab Uddin, Ahsan Ahmed, Md Aktarujjaman, Mohammad Moniruzzaman, Mumtahina Ahmed,
 M. F. Mridha, and Md. Jakir Hossen. A hybrid reinforcement learning and knowledge graph framework
 for financial risk optimization in healthcare systems. Scientific Reports, 15(1):29057, 2025. ISSN 2045-2322.
 doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-14355-8.


                                                     44
William van Melle. MYCIN: A knowledge-based consultation program for infectious disease diagnosis.
 International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 10(3):313–322, 1978. ISSN 0020-7373. doi: 10.1016/
 S0020-7373(78)80049-2.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser,
  and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30:
  5998–6008, 2017.

Pablo Villalobos, Anson Ho, Jaime Sevilla, Tamay Besiroglu, Lennart Heim, and Marius Hobbhahn. Position:
  Will we run out of data? Limits of LLM scaling based on human-generated data, 2024. In Proceedings of
  the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning.

Warren J. von Eschenbach. Transparency and the black box problem: Why we do not trust AI. Philosophy
 & Technology, 34(4):1607–1622, 2021. ISSN 2210-5441. doi: 10.1007/s13347-021-00477-0.

Cunxiang Wang, Xiaoze Liu, Yuanhao Yue, Qipeng Guo, Xiangkun Hu, Xiangru Tang, Tianhang Zhang,
  Cheng Jiayang, Yunzhi Yao, Xuming Hu, Zehan Qi, Wenyang Gao, Yidong Wang, Linyi Yang, Jindong
  Wang, Xing Xie, Zheng Zhang, and Yue Zhang. Survey on factuality in large language models. ACM
  Computing Surveys, 58(1), September 2025a. ISSN 0360-0300. doi: 10.1145/3742420.

Fei Wang, Xingchen Wan, Ruoxi Sun, Jiefeng Chen, and Sercan O. Arik. Astute RAG: Overcoming imperfect
  retrieval augmentation and knowledge conflicts for large language models, 2024a. arXiv:2410.07176 [cs.CL].

J. Wang, Y. Liu, P. Li, Z. Lin, S. Sindakis, and S. Aggarwal. Overview of data quality: Examining the
  dimensions, antecedents, and impacts of data quality. Journal of the Knowledge Economy, pp. 1–20, 2023.
  doi: 10.1007/s13132-022-01096-6. Epub ahead of print, PMID: 40479478, PMCID: PMC9912223.

Junda Wang, Zonghai Yao, Zhichao Yang, Huixue Zhou, Rumeng Li, Xun Wang, Yucheng Xu, and Hong Yu.
  NoteChat: A dataset of synthetic patient-physician conversations conditioned on clinical notes, August
  2024b. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024.

Ke Wang, Jiahui Zhu, Minjie Ren, Zeming Liu, Shiwei Li, Zongye Zhang, Chenkai Zhang, Xiaoyu Wu, Qiqi
 Zhan, Qingjie Liu, and Yunhong Wang. A survey on data synthesis and augmentation for large language
 models, 2024c. arXiv:2410.12896 [cs.CL].

Rui Wang, Fei Mi, Yi Chen, Boyang Xue, Hongru Wang, Qi Zhu, Kam-Fai Wong, and Ruifeng Xu. Role
  prompting guided domain adaptation with general capability preserve for large language models, June
  2024d. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024.

Xiangyu Wang, Lyuzhou Chen, Taiyu Ban, Muhammad Usman, Yifeng Guan, Shikang Liu, Tianhao Wu,
  and Huanhuan Chen. Knowledge graph quality control: A survey. Fundamental Research, 1(5):607–626,
  2021. ISSN 2667-3258. doi: 10.1016/j.fmre.2021.09.003.

Xiaoye Wang, Nicole Xi Zhang, Hongyu He, Trang Nguyen, Kun-Hsing Yu, Hao Deng, Cynthia Brandt,
  Danielle S. Bitterman, Ling Pan, Ching-Yu Cheng, James Zou, and Dianbo Liu. Safety challenges of AI
  in medicine in the era of large language models, 2025b. arXiv:2409.18968 [cs.CY].

Yuhao Wang, Ruiyang Ren, Junyi Li, Xin Zhao, Jing Liu, and Ji-Rong Wen. Rear: A relevance-aware
  retrieval-augmented framework for open-domain question answering, 2024e. In Proceedings of the 2024
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2024), Miami, Florida, USA.

Yuxia Wang, Minghan Wang, Muhammad Arslan Manzoor, Fei Liu, Georgi Nenkov Georgiev, Rocktim Jyoti
  Das, and Preslav Nakov. Factuality of large language models: A survey, November 2024f. In Proceedings
  of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.

Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
  Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy
  Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language models, 2022. arXiv:2206.07682
  [cs.CL].


                                                    45
Peter West, Chandra Bhagavatula, Jack Hessel, Jena Hwang, Liwei Jiang, Ronan Le Bras, Ximing Lu, Sean
  Welleck, and Yejin Choi. Symbolic knowledge distillation: From general language models to commonsense
  models, July 2022. In Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies.
Wolfram Research Inc.    Mathematica, version 14.3.              Champaign,    IL, 2025. Available from
 https://www.wolfram.com/mathematica/.
World Health Organization. International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems,
 10th Revision (ICD-10). 1992. URL https://icd.who.int/browse10/2019/en.
Tianle Xia, Liang Ding, Guojia Wan, Yibing Zhan, Bo Du, and Dacheng Tao. Improving complex reason-
  ing over knowledge graph with logic-aware curriculum tuning. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, 39(12):12881–12889, 2025. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v39i12.33405.
F. Xiao, L. Zhou, Y. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Liu, H. Yu, X. Li, C. Wang, X. Yin, and X. Gao. Comparison of brain
  gray matter volume changes in peritoneal dialysis and hemodialysis patients with chronic kidney disease:
  a VBM study. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 18:1394169, 2024. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2024.1394169.
Derong Xu, Wei Chen, Wenjun Peng, Chao Zhang, Tong Xu, Xiangyu Zhao, Xian Wu, Yefeng Zheng, Yang
  Wang, and Enhong Chen. Large language models for generative information extraction: a survey. Frontiers
  of Computer Science, 18, 2024. doi: 10.1007/s11704-024-40555-y.
Xiao Xu, Xian Xu, Yuyao Sun, Xiaoshuang Liu, Xiang Li, Guotong Xie, and Fei Wang. Predictive modeling
  of clinical events with mutual enhancement between longitudinal patient records and medical knowledge
  graph, 2021. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Data Mining.
Ziwei Xu, Sanjay Jain, and Mohan Kankanhalli. Hallucination is inevitable: An innate limitation of large
  language models, 2025. arXiv:2401.11817 [cs.CL].
Fangkai Yang, Pu Zhao, Zezhong Wang, Lu Wang, Bo Qiao, Jue Zhang, Mohit Garg, Qingwei Lin, Saravan
  Rajmohan, and Dongmei Zhang. Empower large language model to perform better on industrial domain-
  specific question answering, December 2023. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing: Industry Track.
Hao Yang, Jinhui Li, Chen Zhang, Alejandro P. Sierra, and Bin Shen. Large language model-driven knowledge
  graph construction in sepsis care using multicenter clinical databases: Development and usability study.
  Journal of Medical Internet Research, 27:e65537, March 2025. doi: 10.2196/65537.
Xi Ye and Greg Durrett. The unreliability of explanations in few-shot prompting for textual reasoning, 2022.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Chengxuan Ying, Tianle Cai, Shengjie Luo, Shuxin Zheng, Guolin Ke, Di He, Yanming Shen, and Tie-Yan
  Liu. Do transformers really perform badly for graph representation? Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:28877–28888, 2021.
Shenglai Zeng, Jiankun Zhang, Bingheng Li, Yuping Lin, Tianqi Zheng, Dante Everaert, Hanqing Lu, Hui
  Liu, Hui Liu, Yue Xing, Monica Xiao Cheng, and Jiliang Tang. Towards knowledge checking in retrieval-
  augmented generation: A representation perspective, April 2025. In Proceedings of the Conference of
  the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers).
Jing Zhang, Bo Chen, Lingxi Zhang, Xirui Ke, and Haipeng Ding. Neural, symbolic and neural-symbolic
  reasoning on knowledge graphs. AI Open, 2:14–35, 2021. ISSN 2666-6510. doi: 10.1016/j.aiopen.2021.03.
  001.
Ruizhe Zhang, Yongxin Xu, Yuzhen Xiao, Runchuan Zhu, Xinke Jiang, Xu Chu, Junfeng Zhao, and
  Yasha Wang. KnowPO: Knowledge-aware preference optimization for controllable knowledge selection
  in retrieval-augmented language models, 2025. In Proceedings of the Association for the Advancement of
  Artificial Intelligence Conference.


                                                    46
Wen Zhang, Jiaoyan Chen, Juan Li, Zezhong Xu, Jeff Z. Pan, and Huajun Chen. Knowledge graph reasoning
 with logics and embeddings: Survey and perspective, 2024a. In Proccedings of the IEEE International
 Conference on Knowledge Graph.

Yuji Zhang, Sha Li, Jiateng Liu, Pengfei Yu, Yi R. Fung, Jing Li, Manling Li, and Heng Ji. Knowledge
  overshadowing causes amalgamated hallucination in large language models, 2024b. arXiv:2407.08039
  [cs.CL].

Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min, Beichen
 Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, Yifan Du, Chen Yang, Yushuo Chen, Zhipeng Chen, Jinhao Jiang,
 Ruiyang Ren, Yifan Li, Xinyu Tang, Zikang Liu, Peiyu Liu, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen. A survey of
 large language models, 2025. arXiv:2303.18223 [cs.CL].

Shuran Zheng, Xuan Qi, Rui Ray Chen, Yongchan Kwon, and James Zou. Proper dataset valuation by
  pointwise mutual information, 2025. arXiv:2405.18253 [cs.LG].

Lingfeng Zhong, Jia Wu, Qian Li, Hao Peng, and Xindong Wu. A comprehensive survey on automatic
  knowledge graph construction. ACM Computing Surveys, 56(4), November 2023. ISSN 0360-0300. doi:
  10.1145/3618295.

Kaitlyn Zhou, Kawin Ethayarajh, Dallas Card, and Dan Jurafsky. Problems with cosine as a measure of
 embedding similarity for high frequency words, May 2022. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of
 the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers).

Lexin Zhou, Wout Schellaert, Fernando Martínez-Plumed, Yael Moros-Daval, Cèsar Ferri, and José
  Hernández-Orallo. Larger and more instructable language models become less reliable. Nature, 634(8032):
  61–68, 2024. ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07930-y.

Yuqi Zhu, Xiaohan Wang, Jing Chen, Shuofei Qiao, Yixin Ou, Yunzhi Yao, Shumin Deng, Huajun Chen,
  and Ningyu Zhang. LLMs for knowledge graph construction and reasoning: Recent capabilities and future
  opportunities. World Wide Web, 27(5), August 2024. ISSN 1386-145X. doi: 10.1007/s11280-024-01297-w.




Appendices
A    Training Data

We exclude some relations from the UMLS KG that add little semantic value, i.e.: (i) custom-defined
mappings of outdated-to-new UMLS relations for backward compatibility, which cannot be inferred from
external data; (ii) relations used only for cross-vocabulary mappings; (iii) relations where tails are largely
redundant with respect to heads; and (iv) relations with very few possible tails. For example, relation
has_associated_finding is a redundant relation:

• family history of diabetes, has_associated_finding, diabetes mellitus
• family history of glaucoma, has_associated_finding, glaucoma
• parental history of diabetes, has_associated_finding, diabetes mellitus
• family history of hypertension, has_associated_finding, hypertensive disorder
• family history of cvd, has_associated_finding, congenital heart disease

In these cases, the tail subject is the same as the head subject. has_laterality is an example of a relation
with very few possible tails, with almost all tails being “side”.


                                                     47
                                 Table A1: Excluded UMLS relations

acted_on_by_process               has_scale_type                     regulated_by
active_ingredient_of              has_specimen                       replaced_by
associated_procedure_of           has_subject_relationship_context   replaces
basis_of_strength_substance_of    has_temporal_context               was_a
component_of                      inverse_was_a                      has_intent
consider_from                     mapped_from                        referred_to_by
direct_device_of                  mapped_to                          refers_to
direct_substance_of               moved_to                           characterizes
has_associated_finding            negatively_regulated_by            substance_used_by
has_finding_context               positively_regulated_by            specimen_source_topography_of
has_interpretation                possibly_replaces                  specimen_substance_of
has_laterality                    precise_active_ingredient_of       has_active_ingredient
has_realization                   realization_of                     has_property



 (
       (
           diabetes [ Abstract ] OR diabetes [ Body - All Words ] OR diabetes [ Body - Key
                Terms ]
       )
     OR (
       ’’ diabetes mellitus ’ ’[ MeSH Terms ] OR ’’ diabetes insipidus ’ ’[ MeSH Terms ]
     )
 )
 OR diabetes [ Title ]
 NOT (
   ’’ sars - cov -2 ’ ’[ MeSH Terms ] OR ’’ covid -19 ’ ’[ MeSH Terms ]
 )
 AND (
   medline [ sb ] AND ’ ’2019/04/01 ’ ’[ PubDate ] : ’ ’2025/04/01 ’ ’[ PubDate ]
 )

                                  Listing 1: PubMed search query




                                                48
B    KG Injection Algorithm

Input: Sequences with heads: Each head h may have multiple triples T = ⟨h, r, t⟩ = T (seq) in sequence
seq (we cap this number at 40 triples to ensure enough diversity and leaving room for further dropping);
triple embedding similarity score with respect to the sequence: score(T ); similarity matching threshold α (a
hyperparameter).
Output: Each head has one injection T (seq) or does not have any, in all sequences.

Preprocessing

     1. Drop all triples with a score less than threshold α.

     2. Make all triples unique: If a triple matches multiple sequences, retain the triple T̃ with the highest
        score, i.e., in the sequence to which the triple is most relevant:

                                              T̃ = arg max score(T (seq))
                                                     seq


The second preprocessing step prevents overfitting in the semantic space on common triples.

Triple selection for each head: To balance contextual relevance with relation diversity: 1st priority:
maximize injection score, 2nd priority: maintain relation diversity. Relation diversity is measured by the
number of unique triples that contain the relation.
Maximize diversity

     1. Split relations into relation buckets based on the number of unique triples at step k and assume that
        within each bucket all relations are equally diverse (e.g., k = 20 implies that relations with #triples
        100-120, 120-140.., are treated as equally diverse).
     2. Within each relation bucket, sort all triples by score regardless of relation.
     3. Start with the lowest-numbered bucket (rarest relations). Within it, start with the triple with the
        highest score and retain only it for its head, removing all other matched triples, which may have a
        higher score but may be in a higher relation bucket. As a result, one of the rarest possible relations
        in the dataset would survive for this head, increasing relation diversity overall.

Maximize score then diversity

     1. Order triples by score.

     2. Split into score buckets: Assume that within each score bucket, triples are equally good.
     3. Then, within each score bucket, apply Maximize diversity.

Altogether, we group triples by how “low” the score is (higher scores are assigned to lower-bucket IDs). Then,
within each score bucket, we favor relation types that are less frequent. Finally, we choose the highest-scoring
triple for each head.
The algorithm is implemented using the Pandas framework and presented in Algorithm 1.
In our experiments, we use score_bucket_size = 0.01, relation_bucket_size = 100. The bucket size and
relation bucket size are chosen under the assumption that, within each bucket, score and relation diversity
remain approximately balanced.




                                                      49
Algorithm 1: Maximize Score then Diversity
Input : df (a Pandas DataFrame where each row comprises a triple (h, r, t), unique
        matched_head_id, and an associated score), score_bucket_size, relation_bucket_size
Output: Filtered DataFrame result
max_s ← max(df.score);
foreach row in df do
   row.score_bucket ← ⌊(max_s − row.score)/score_bucket_size⌋;
rel_counts ← count occurrences of each relation_type r in df ;
foreach row in df do
   rel_count ← rel_counts[row.r];
   row.rel_bucket ← ⌊rel_count/relation_bucket_size⌋;
Sort df by ascending (score_bucket, rel_bucket) and by descending score;
result ← [ ];
seen_heads ← ∅;
foreach row in sorted df do
   if row.matched_head_id ∈  / seen_heads then
       append row to result;
       seen_heads ← seen_heads ∪ {row.matched_head_id};
// Equivalent to df.drop_duplicates(subset=”matched_head_id”, keep=”first”)
return result;




          Table B1: Seed KG: Relation statistics for α = 0.55 in the training split (Qwen3-32B)

    # Relation                      # injections             # Relation                    # injections
    1   isa                                8627              15   possibly_equivalent_to           446
    2   inverse_isa                        5512              16   has_component                    433
    3   cause_of                           1440              17   due_to                           365
    4   interprets                         1268              18   has_part                         350
    5   associated_finding_of              1145              19   has_modification                 310
    6   has_disposition                    1084              20   associated_with                  254
    7   focus_of                           1038              21   part_of                          211
    8   is_interpreted_by                   962              22   plays_role                       194
    9   has_associated_morphology           863              23   occurs_before                    187
   10   causative_agent_of                  809              24   has_clinical_course              144
   11   finding_site_of                     741              25   occurs_in                        138
   12   associated_morphology_of            598              26   same_as                          134
   13   has_method                          515              27   has_causative_agent              127
   14   has_finding_site                    477              28   has_focus                        118




                                                   50
                                                             Comparison of Relation Frequencies (Logarithmic Scale)
                                          5
                                                                                                                      Extracted KG:
                                     10                                                                                    Beta 65
                                                                                                                           Seed KG




 Number of Occurrences (Log Scale)
                                          4
                                     10




                                          3
                                     10




                                          2
                                     10

      as
 ass socia
    oci ate ed_fi
            d_   t
               mo dingrph _ofn
              ass ology
         cau ociat _of
              sat ed_
                    ive with
                         _a    ge
                find due_  cau of  nt_
                                   se_  of
has_asso  cia ted focu
      ha _mo s_of       ing to_si  te_  of
          s_c  au pholo
         ha ative gy
            s_c     s
                  lini agen
                        cal  r  _         t
              ha
               ha
             ha poss_c ours
                         om e
                   s_d oneni s_ pc        t
                  s_f   ind tion
                         ha iteing
                               s_f   i
                                    _s
             ha s_me ha ocus
                s_m th   od od ific atio
            is_ vers   in    ha n
                           inte rts_p
                                  rpr  a
                                       e ts
                inte e_i
                occ     rpr saete   d_  by
                        urs isa_b
                          occ re   efo
                                  urs  _in
     po ssi bly plays f
                _e   qu role
                          iva   pa _
                                 lenrt_ o
                           sam to   e_t_as


Figure C1: Relation distribution in the GraphMERT-extracted KG vs. seed KG. The shapes differ: While
“isa” prevails in the seed KG, the GraphMERT KG is heavily skewed towards “associated_with.” This
reflects the helper LLM’s inclination to select “associated_with” during relation matching as the most
appropriate, given a sequence.


C                                    Extracted KGs

C.1                                  Relation Distribution: GraphMERT-extracted KG vs. Seed KG

Fig. C1 shows the relation distribution on a logarithmic scale. While “isa” is the most represented relation
in the training data, in the to-be-extracted KG, the helper LLM tends to select “associated_with” most
frequently during relation matching.

C.2                                  Sanity Check

We ran a lightweight screening with GPT-5 Thinking on small, comparable samples from each KG. This
screening should be viewed as complementary to benchmark-based verification, providing useful diagnostic
signals but not replacing factual evaluation.


Setup: For each KG, we retrieved all triples whose head contains the keywords “insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF-1)” and “glucocorticoid receptor (GR).” These terms are highly relevant to diabetes, yield comparable
sample sizes per KG (22–29), and remain small enough for human inspection.

 Prompt. Evaluate if these medical KG triples are valid (yes/no/maybe) and give a very short reason
 why: ⟨list of triples⟩.



                                                                                  51
Table C1: Example of GraphMERT-extracted triple with novel tail vocabulary from a 128-token sequence.
The seed KG does not include the token “nlrp3” — it was learned and extracted from the text. “Pathway”
is a token that GraphMERT learned from the training corpus. Here, “pathway” is implicitly supported:
The phrase “specific inhibitors of NLRP3 inflammasome activation” links the activation to NLRP3-mediated
signaling (i.e., the NLRP3 pathway).

 Sequence: . . . inflammasome activation and regulation is highlighted, including its putative roles in adipose tissue
 dysfunction and insulin resistance. Specific inhibitors of NLRP3 inflammasome activation which can potentially
 be used to treat metabolic disorders are also discussed. Identifying a quantitative biomarker of neuropsychiatric
 dysfunction in people with HIV (PWH) remains a significant challenge in the neuroHIV field. The strongest evidence
 to date implicates the role of monocytes in central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction in HIV, yet no study has
 examined monocyte subsets in blood as a correlate and/or predictor of neuropsychiatric function in virally suppressed
 PWH. METHODS In 2 independent cohorts of virologically suppressed women with HIV (vsWWH. . .
 Head                                  Relation                  Tail
 inflammasome activation               associated_with           nlrp3 pathway

                       Table C2: GPT-5 Thinking screening (counts with proportions)

                     Keyword       KG                 Yes        Maybe         No       Total
                     IGF–1         LLM              8 (0.28)     3 (0.10)   18 (0.62)     29
                     IGF–1         GraphMERT        15 (0.68)    0 (0.00)    7 (0.32)     22
                     GR            LLM              4 (0.17)    12 (0.50)    8 (0.33)     24
                     GR            GraphMERT        15 (0.54)    7 (0.25)    6 (0.21)     28


Table C2 summarizes screening results. Tables C3, C4, C5, C6 provide GPT-5 Thinking responses for each
triple in the GraphMERT and LLM KG samples.




                                                         52
Table C3: GraphMERT KG. Sanity check with GPT-5 Thinking. We select all KG triples that contain
“insulin-like growth factor-1,” 22 triples in total, yes/no/maybe: 15/0/7.

 Triple                                                         Verdict GPT-5 explanation
 insulin-like growth factor 1, isa, peptide hormone             yes      70-aa peptide hormone.
 insulin-like growth factor 1, isa, growth factor               yes      Canonical growth factor.
 insulin-like growth factor 1, associated_with, insulin         yes      Correlates with IR.
 resistance
 insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R), plays_role,     maybe “Target” is vague.
 target
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), associated_with,         yes      Linked with DM.
 diabetes mellitus
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), associated_with,         maybe Biomarker is a role.
 biomarker
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), associated_with,         yes      Strong crosstalk.
 insulin
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), associated_with, type    yes      Epidemiologic link.
 2 diabetes
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), associated_with,         yes      Well supported.
 insulin resistance
 insulin-like growth factor 1, plays_role, growth factor        yes   Acts as growth factor.
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), plays_role, biomarkers   maybe Plural/ontology mismatch.
 insulin/insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) signaling         yes   IGF-1R is in pathway.
 pathway, has_component, IGF-1 receptor
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), associated_with,         yes      Duplicate; supported.
 insulin
 insulin-like growth factor 1, plays_role, growth hormone       yes      Mediates GH effects.
 action
 insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R), plays_role,     yes      RTK signaling receptor.
 signaling receptor
 insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor, plays_role, signaling   yes   Mediates signaling.
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), associated_with,          maybe Context-specific crosstalk.
 androgen
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), associated_with,          maybe Indirect gene-expression effects.
 transcription
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), associated_with,         maybe Context dependent.
 hyperglycemia
 insulin-like growth factor 1 level, associated_with, growth    yes      GH raises IGF-1.
 hormone treatment
 insulin/insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) signaling         yes      IR is in pathway.
 pathway, has_component, insulin receptor
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), plays_role, downstream    maybe Phrasing vague (GH
 target                                                               downstream).




                                                    53
Table C4: (Part 1 of 2). LLM KG (Qwen3-32B). Sanity check with GPT-5 Thinking. We select all KG
triples that contain “insulin-like growth factor-1,” 29 triples in total, yes/no/maybe: 8/18/3.

 Triple                                                         Verdict GPT-5 explanation
 insulin-like growth factor 1, associated_with, diabetes        yes     Linked with DM.
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), has_direct_substance,    no      Disease ̸= substance.
 type 2 diabetes
 insulin-like growth factor 1, associated_with, insulin         yes     Strong physiologic link.
 resistance
 insulin-like growth factor 1, associated_with, metabolic       yes     Levels track MetS.
 syndrome
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), associated_with,         yes     GH/IGF axis altered.
 chronic kidney disease
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), has_direct_substance,    no      Disease ̸= substance.
 gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM)
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), has_direct_substance,     no      Process, not substance.
 angiogenesis
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), has_direct_substance,    no      Unrelated metabolites.
 short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs)
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), has_component,           no    Pathway ̸= component of
 insulin signaling pathway                                            ligand.
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), plays_role,              maybe Broad/context-dependent.
 cardiovascular health
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), associated_with, bone    yes     Anabolic for bone.
 metabolism
 insulin-like growth factor 1, has_part, growth hormone         no      GH regulates; not part.
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), cause_of, prostate       no      Association ̸= causation.
 cancer (PCA)
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), has_modification, left   no    Clinical metric, not
 ventricular global longitudinal strain (LVGLS)                       modification.
 insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor, cause_of,               maybe Signaling can induce EMT.
 epithelial-mesenchymal transition
 insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), has_modification,        no      Not a molecular modification.
 HAAT-MSCs
 insulin-like growth factor 1, has_direct_substance, testis     no    Organ produces IGF-1.
 insulin-like growth factor 1, plays_role, endocrine-related    maybe Vague class-level claim.
 cancers




                                                    54
                     Table C4: (Part 2 of 2). LLM KG (Qwen3-32B). (continued)

Triple                                                         Verdict GPT-5 explanation
insulin-like growth factor 1, associated_with, oocyte cohort   yes    Follicular IGF-1 correlates.
quality
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), has_component,            no     Downstream effector, not
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)                                      component.
insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor, isa, receptor           yes    Canonical RTK.
insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor, has_direct_substance,   no     Not a receptor substance.
lactate dehydrogenase a
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1),                           no     Not a pathology.
has_pathological_process, core body temperature
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), has_component,            no     Binding partner, not
IGF-binding protein 3 (IGFBP3)                                        component.
insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor, has_method,             no     Wrong relation/atypical
JAKS2/STAT3 pathway                                                   pathway.
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), has_component,            no     Unrelated protein.
ZYG11A
insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R), has_part,      no     PI3K is recruited, not part.
nositide 3-kinase (PI3K)
IGF-1 (insulin-like growth factor 1), has_direct_substance,    no     transcription factor ̸= substance
PPARγ (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma)              of IGF-1.
insulin-like growth factor 1, plays_role, cardiac              yes    Supports cardiac growth.
development




                                                   55
Table C5: GraphMERT KG. Sanity check with GPT-5 Thinking. We select all KG triples that contain
“glucocorticoid receptor,” 28 triples in total, yes/no/maybe: 15/6/7.

 Triple                                                          Verdict GPT-5 explanation
 endothelial glucocorticoid receptor, plays_role, therapeutic    maybe Role is
 role                                                                  vague/context-dependent.
 endothelial glucocorticoid receptor, plays_role,                yes   Mediates GC signaling in
 glucocorticoid signaling                                              endothelium.
 endothelial glucocorticoid receptor, plays_role, protective     maybe Protective effects reported but
 role                                                                  not universal.
 glucocorticoid receptor (GR), plays_role, glucocorticoid        yes   Canonical function.
 signaling
 glucocorticoid receptor, associated_with, insulin signaling     yes   Well-known pathway crosstalk.
 glucocorticoid receptor, has_part, ligand-binding               maybe Should be “ligand-binding
                                                                       domain.”
 endothelial glucocorticoid receptor, has_disposition,           no    Wrong relation; participates in
 signaling                                                             signaling.
 glucocorticoid receptor, plays_role, glucocorticoid receptor    yes   Tautologically true.
 signaling
 glucocorticoid receptor (GR), plays_role, hypothalamic          maybe HPA feedback involvement but
 signaling                                                             broad.
 endothelial glucocorticoid receptor, has_disposition,           no    “Immunomodulator” is an agent
 immunomodulator                                                       role, not a disposition.
 glucocorticoid receptor (GR), plays_role, steroid signaling     yes   Nuclear steroid receptor
                                                                       pathway.
 glucocorticoid receptor (GR), associated_with,                  yes   Binds GC ligands.
 glucocorticoids
 glucocorticoid receptor agonists, plays_role, therapeutic       yes   Used clinically.
 glucocorticoid receptor (GR), plays_role, steroid hormone       no    This is an is_a identity, not a
 receptor                                                              role.
 glucocorticoid receptor gene (NR3C1), associated_with,          maybe Gene encodes one; relation
 hormone receptor                                                      imprecise.
 glucocorticoid receptor, plays_role, signaling                  yes   Ligand-activated signaling/TF
                                                                       activity.
 glucocorticoid receptor (GR), associated_with, steroid          yes   Glucocorticoids are steroids.
 selective glucocorticoid receptor agonists, plays_role,         maybe Class intended for therapy;
 therapeutic role                                                      phrasing vague.
 endothelial glucocorticoid receptor, cause_of, renal fibrosis   no    GR generally anti-fibrotic;
                                                                       causation unsupported.
 selective glucocorticoid receptor modulators, plays_role,       no    Category is is_a, not a role.
 pharmacological modulator
 glucocorticoid receptor, associated_with, glucocorticoids       yes     Duplicate; correct.
 glucocorticoid receptor (GR), plays_role, glucocorticoid        yes     Duplicate; correct.
 signaling
 glucocorticoid receptor α, plays_role, steroid receptor         no      α isoform is_a steroid receptor,
                                                                         not a role.
 glucocorticoid receptor (GR), associated_with,                  yes     Ligand-activated transcription
 transcription                                                           factor.
 glucocorticoid receptor, plays_role, signaling                  yes     Duplicate; correct.
 glucocorticoid receptor (GR), associated_with, hormone          yes     Responds to hormones (GCs).
 glucocorticoid receptor (GR), associated_with, signaling        yes     Broad but true.
 selective glucocorticoid receptor modulators, plays_role,       no      Duplicate; is_a, not a role.
 pharmacological modulator



                                                     56
Table C6: LLM KG (Qwen3-32B). Sanity check with GPT-5 Thinking. We select all KG triples that contain
“glucocorticoid receptor,” 24 triples in total, yes/no/maybe: 4/18/2.

 Triple                                                    Verdict GPT-5 explanation
 glucocorticoid receptor haploinsufficiency, cause_of,     yes      GR resistance drives
 hypertension                                                       mineralocorticoid excess →
                                                                    hypertension.
 glucocorticoid receptor, associated_with, insulin         yes      GC/GR signaling induces IR.
 resistance
 glucocorticoid receptor locus (GRL) polymorphisms,        yes      NR3C1 variants linked to T2D risk.
 associated_with, type 2 diabetes (T2D)
 podocyte-specific glucocorticoid receptor knockout        yes      Podocyte GR loss worsens DN
 (GR pKO) mice, has_pathological_process, diabetic                  phenotype.
 nephropathy
 glucocorticoid receptor, has_component, autophagy         no       Autophagy is a process, not a
                                                                    receptor component.
 glucocorticoid receptor (GR), finding_site_of, liver      no       Relation reversed; GR is located in
                                                                    liver.
 glucocorticoid receptor, has_component, diabetic          no       Diseases aren’t receptor components.
 complications
 endothelial glucocorticoid receptor (GR),                 no       Relation misuse; fibrosis doesn’t
 has_causative_agent, renal fibrosis                                “cause” the receptor.
 glucocorticoid receptor, has_disposition, cortisol        no       Cortisol is a ligand, not a
                                                                    disposition.
 glucocorticoid receptor alpha, has_component,             no       COVID-19 isn’t a component.
 coronavirus disease 2019
 glucocorticoid receptor, has_component, estrogen          no    Hormone ̸= receptor component.
 endothelial glucocorticoid receptor (GR),                 no    WNT signaling isn’t inherently
 has_pathological_process, WNT signaling                         pathological.
 glucocorticoid receptor, has_pathological_process,        maybe Excess GR signaling leads to
 osteoporosis (OP)                                               GC-induced OP; relation loose.
 glucocorticoid receptor, has_direct_substance,            no    GR regulates PEPCK expression;
 PEPCK                                                           not a substance of GR.
 glucocorticoid receptor (GR), has_direct_substance,       no    Cells aren’t receptor substances.
 Kupffer cells
 glucocorticoid receptor (GR), has_component, Leydig       no       Tissues/cells aren’t components of a
 cells                                                              receptor.
 glucocorticoid receptor, has_direct_substance, stress     no       Process ̸= substance.
 response
 glucocorticoid receptor, associated_with, miR-32-5p       maybe Limited, context-specific miRNA
                                                                 linkage.
 glucocorticoid receptor, has_direct_substance, G6P        no    Metabolite isn’t a receptor
                                                                 substance.
 glucocorticoid receptor, has_component,                   no    Possible cofactor interaction, not a
 SETD1A/COMPASS complex                                          component.
 glucocorticoid receptor (GR), has_direct_substance,       no    TF interactor, not a substance of
 STAT6                                                           GR.
 glucocorticoid receptor (GR), has_direct_substance,       no    Cells ̸= substances.
 adipose tissue macrophage (ATM)
 glucocorticoid receptor (GR), has_component,              no       Neurons aren’t receptor components.
 peripheral sensory neurons
 glucocorticoid receptor β                                 no       SNP pertains to gene, not isoform
 (GRβ)has_direct_substancers948820149                               “substance.”



                                                      57
D    GraphRAG evaluation on Medical Benchmarks

                       Table D1: GraphRAG KG evaluation on public benchmarks

                                            MedMCQA         MedQA   MMLU (medical)
                       # Questions             61             75        62
                       LLM KG (baseline)        72.1         85.3         71.0
                       Seed KG                  76.5         81.3         73.1
                       GraphMERT                73.8         88.0         74.7


In this evaluation, we select questions related to diabetes and its comorbidities from popular medical bench-
marks and run GraphRAG evaluation on the selected questions. We first filter the benchmarks with the
Qwen3-32B model, as stated in Section 5.3.2, and then manually review and remove some questions that are
irrelevant to diabetes.




                                                       58
E   Helper LLM prompts



We include only one example for all few-shot settings. For each prompt, all examples are mined from the
dataset. Then, we prompt GPT-o3 with the zero-shot prompt, edit the reply if needed, and include it as a
few-shot example.
All sequences in our datasets are lower-case; here, we use normal case to improve readability.




                                             Entity Discovery Prompt
 You are a medical-domain extractor building a diabetes KG of ⟨head, relation, tail⟩. You possess advanced
 medical academic knowledge.

 Given an input sequence, identify entities specifically relevant to diabetes, its complications, comorbidities, ther-
 apeutics, and related biomedical entities that help to clarify or contextualize them. Output a Python list of up
 to 6-word entity “heads” following these rules:
       1. Select a precise and medically-specific span (e.g., “myocardial infarction,” not “infarction”). Avoid
          generic terms like “disease,” “condition,” “patients,” and “comorbidity” without a specific context. When
          encountering vague descriptors like “complication,” “symptom,” or “effect,” always prefer explicitly
          named conditions or symptoms directly linked to diabetes pathology or diabetes comorbidities.
       2. Keep original spelling, casing, and abbreviations from the sequence.
       3. Choose only entities that add meaningful medical knowledge to the diabetes KG. Do not include COVID-
          related terms. Do not include head entities that describe findings in animal models (mice, rats, etc.).
       4. A few examples of low-value entities you should not include:
            • ‘≥ 10 % weight reduction’ (too context-dependent).
            • ‘nhanes 2015 - 2018’ (dataset/survey, not a medical entity).
            • ‘semaglutide 2.4 mg’ (includes a dosage, which can vary).
            • ‘60+ women’ (“60+” is too context-dependent).
            • “anxiety,” “home births,” “pregnant women,” “neonatal deaths,” “general practitioners” (not spe-
              cific enough to diabetes; only include if explicitly related to diabetes).
       5. If it is not clear whether a term adds diabetes-specific knowledge, look at the context. If the text
          explicitly links the term to a diabetes-specific concept, include it. Otherwise, exclude it when mentioned
          only in a generic context. Include such terms when the sequence clearly links them to a diabetes-relevant
          gene, pathway, cell type, or therapeutic effect.

 You will be provided with incorrect output examples beginning with “Output (Incorrect).” Use them to avoid the
 common mistakes. Wrap your intermediate reasoning steps clearly within ⟨think⟩ ... ⟨/think⟩ tags. Be strict and
 discard any entity about which you are uncertain and that is not relevant to diabetes. After generating, verify
 your output.

 Steps:
       1. Identify candidate spans.
       2. Filter by medical precision and relevance rules.
       3. Confirm the entity’s relevance and contribution to the diabetes KG; discard low-value entities.

 Input format: sequence
 Output format: [‘head1’, ‘head2’, ...]. If none, output [].



                                                          59
                               Few-shot Example for Entity Discovery Prompt

Input:


  sequence: . . . , its upstream regulator has the opposite effect (Han et al., 2013). Previous studies suggest that
  CHOP deteriorates ER stress and accelerates cell death via promoting protein synthesis and oxidative stress
  (Han et al., 2013). In addition, ER stress damages β-cells, possibly through altering Ca2+ homeostasis. It
  has been indicated that ER stress interferes with the function of RyR located in the membrane of the ER
  and causes leakage of ER Ca2+ (Yamamoto et al., 2019). The destruction of β-cell ER Ca2+ homeostasis
  results in impaired insulin secretion and further promotion of β-cell death . . .

Output:
[‘‘chop,’’ ‘‘er stress,’’ ‘‘ryr,’’ ‘‘$\beta$-cells,’’ ‘‘impaired insulin secretion’’]

The rationale behind the output:
Candidates: CHOP; ER stress; β-cells; RyR; impaired insulin secretion; oxidative stress; protein synthesis. Keep
precise diabetes-relevant entities: CHOP (ER stress regulator), ER stress, β-cells, RyR, impaired insulin secretion.

                                           Relation Matching Prompt
You are a medical intelligence with academic knowledge in diabetes and comorbidities. We are building a diabetes
knowledge graph of triples ⟨head, relation, tail⟩.

Given:
      • a sequence including biomedical context,
      • a list of heads,
return, for each head, all relations chosen from the list below that could form a plausible KG triple and are
supported by the sequence.

Allowed relations:
###

associated_finding_of                  has_associated_morphology                inverse_isa
associated_morphology_of               has_component                            is_interpreted_by
associated_with                        has_disposition                          isa
causative_agent_of                     has_finding_site                         occurs_before
cause_of                               has_method                               part_of
due_to                                 has_modification                         plays_role
finding_site_of                        has_part                                 possibly_equivalent_to
focus_of                               interprets

###

The relations are taken from UMLS and have the same meaning as in UMLS.
Examples:
-------------
      • carotid artery stenosis | associated_finding_of | history of carotid artery stenosis
      • fibrosis | associated_morphology_of | endomyocardial fibrosis
      • cancer | associated_with | anemia in malignant neoplastic disease
      • Mycobacterium tuberculosis | causative_agent_of | Tuberculosis
      • diabetes mellitus | cause_of | diabetic foot
      • hypoglycemic alcoholic ketoacidosis | due_to | acute alcohol intoxication
      • adipose tissue | finding_site_of | lipoatrophy
      • renal failure | focus_of | emergency hemofiltration



                                                         60
     • hepatitis A | has_associated_morphology | Hepatocellular necrosis
     • fasting triglyceride | has_component | triacylglycerol
     • tumor necrosis factor | has_disposition | immunomodulator
     • melanoma | has_finding_site | skin
     • bariatric surgery | has_method | surgical action
     • glucagon | has_modification | glucagon hydrochloride
     • nephron | has_part | glomerulus
     • overweight | interprets | body weight measure
     • adiponectin | inverse_isa | high molecular weight adiponectin
     • blood eosinophil counts | is_interpreted_by | asthmatic pulmonary eosinophilia
     • empagliflozin | isa | sodium glucose cotransporter subtype 2 inhibitor
     • cardiac amyloidosis | occurs_in | old age
     • coronary syndrome | possibly_equivalent_to | preinfarction syndrome
     • MI | same_as | Myocardial infarction
-------------

Note the meaning of some relations in UMLS: isa and inverse_isa are exact inverses of each other.
     • isa — points up the hierarchy: “Diabetic retinopathy” isa “Retinal disease.” (specific → general)
     • inverse_isa — points down the hierarchy: “Retinal disease” inverse_isa “Diabetic retinopathy.”
     • cause_of — directional link where the source concept is understood to directly or indirectly produce,
        trigger, or give rise to the target concept.
     • due_to — causal link: the subject condition, finding, or situation results from the object. Inverse:
        cause_of.
     • associated_with — non-directional link indicating that two concepts are statistically or clinically linked
        without asserting a clear cause-and-effect direction.
     • has_associated_morphology — links a pathological or clinical entity (typically a disease, syndrome, or
        injury) to the characteristic structural change (“morphology”) it produces. Concretely: source = dis-
        order concept; target = morphologic abnormality (e.g., “Necrosis,” “Hyperplasia,” “Fibrosis”). Inverse:
        associated_morphology_of.
     • associated_finding_of — reads as: “X associated_finding_of Y” “Finding X is the clinical finding
        for which procedure Y is performed.”
-------------

Input format:
sequence
heads: [head1, head2, ...]
Output format:
{
    ‘‘head 1’’: [‘‘relation 1,’’ ‘‘relation 2,’’ ...],
    ‘‘head 2’’: [...],
}

Steps:
      1. Understand Input
          • Clearly understand the biomedical context from the sequence.
          • For each head, find explicit mentions in the text.
          • Check if each head is explicitly linked to other concepts or relations.
     2. Use the list of allowed relations. Evaluate each head individually. Do not overuse the relation
        associated_with — apply it only when appropriate.
     3. For each head, list only plausible and supported relations. Return [] if none apply.

Think concisely within ⟨think⟩ ... ⟨/think⟩. Immediately after, output JSON.



                                                       61
                             Few-shot Example for the Relation Matching Prompt

Input:

    . . . interleukin-1 R6, and receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B (RANK). Together, proteomic data
    suggest the targeting of several key regulators of inflammation, bone, and adipose turnover, via transforming
    growth factor-beta/SMAD, and Wingless-related integration site/be-catenin signaling pathways. To the
    best of the knowledge, this is first evidence of an intervention that drives against bone loss via RANK.
    Metatranscriptomic analyses of the gut microbiota show P7C3 increased Porphyromonadaceae bacterium,
    Candidatus Melainabacteria, and Ruminococcaceae bacterium abundance, potentially contributing to the
    favorable inflammatory. . .

heads: [‘interleukin-1 r6,’ ‘receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-b,’
‘transforming growth factor-beta’]

Output:
{
      ‘‘interleukin-1 r6’’: [‘‘associated_with’’],
      ‘‘receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-b’’: [‘‘cause_of’’],
      ‘‘transforming growth factor-beta’’: [‘‘part_of’’],
}

The rationale behind this output:

interleukin-1 r6 → associated_with → Named as a “key regulator of inflammation,” which links it to the
inflammatory process without stating direction or hierarchy, so the non-causal associated_with relation fits best.

receptor activator of nuclear factor κ-B (RANK) → cause_of → The text says the intervention prevents bone
loss via RANK, implying that RANK signalling produces or drives bone loss; therefore cause_of is appropriate.

transforming growth factor-beta → part_of → Explicitly mentioned within the “TGF-β/Smad signalling
pathway,” so it is a constituent component (part_of) of that pathway.

No additional relations are warranted.




                           Combining GraphMERT-predicted Top Tokens Prompt
You are completing triples for a medical knowledge graph on diabetes and its comorbidities. For each sample,
you’re given a sequence, a head entity in that sequence, a relation, and a list of candidate tokens. The relations
are from UMLS and have the same meaning.

Your task is to output a filtered               list   of    high-quality   and   factual   tails   in   the   format:
[‘‘tail 1,’’ ‘‘tail 2,’’ ...] or [].

To form the list of candidates:
Step 1: Analyze the sequence to understand the context and identify the head entity and relation.
Step 2: Choose candidate tails. You can combine tokens from the candidate list to get the most precise, relevant,
and meaningful tails in the context of the head and relation. Combine subword tokens, too.
Step 3: Verify each candidate.

Verification. Each tail must:
       • Be causally and factually related to the head via the specified relation. Make sure the relation direction
         is correct: the head implies the tail given the relation. Note that isa is a subclass→class relation, and
         inverse_isa is a class→subclass relation.



                                                            62
     • Be supported by the sequence, but you can rely on well-established medical knowledge even if the
       sequence does not spell it out verbatim. If no reliable support exists, reject the tail.
     • Add valuable medical knowledge to the graph. Tails must be non-redundant. When all tails are factual,
       prefer specific tails over general and vague (e.g., “proliferative diabetic retinopathy” over “retinopathy”).
       Terms that include “level,” “disease,” “disorder,” or “complication” are too vague and rarely add useful
       knowledge to the KG.
     • Include only tokens from the list of candidates.
Reason step by step within <think>...</think>.

You will see incorrect outputs labeled “Output (Incorrect).” Avoid similar errors.

Before finalizing:
– Ensure all output constraints are met.
– Validate that each tail is logically, contextually, and factually aligned with the head and relation.
– Confirm that each triple adds meaningful knowledge to the graph.

Note the meaning of some UMLS relations you may encounter in the input:

     • isa and inverse_isa are exact inverses of each other.
           – isa – points up the hierarchy: “Diabetic retinopathy” isa “Retinal disease.” (specific → general)
           – inverse_isa – points down the hierarchy: “Retinal disease” inverse_isa “Diabetic retinopathy.”
     • cause_of – directional link where the source concept directly or indirectly produces, triggers, or gives
       rise to the target concept.
     • due_to – causal link: the subject condition, finding, or situation results from the object. Inverse:
       cause_of.
     • associated_with – non-directional link indicating that two concepts are statistically or clinically linked
       without asserting a clear cause–effect direction.
     • has_associated_morphology – links a pathological or clinical entity (typically a disease, syndrome, or
       injury) to the characteristic structural change (“morphology”) it produces.
       Concretely: source = a disorder concept; target = a Morphologic Abnormality concept (e.g., “Necrosis,”
       “Hyperplasia,” “Fibrosis”). Inverse: associated_morphology_of.
     • associated_finding_of – reads as:
       “X associated_finding_of Y” ⇒ “Finding X is the clinical finding for which procedure Y is performed.”


            Few-Shot Example for Combining GraphMERT-predicted Top Tokens Prompt

Input:


  sequence: . . . 2+ binding to S100A1 EF-hand motifs, the conformation of S100A1 changes and promotes
  interactions with target proteins. RAGE consists of three domains: the cytoplasmic, transmembrane, and
  extracellular domains. The extracellular domain consists of C1, C2, and V domains. V domains are the
  primary receptors for the S100 protein. It was reported several years ago that S100A1 and RAGE V domains
  interact in a pathway involving S100A1-RAGE signaling, whereby S100A1 binds to the V domain, resulting
  in RAGE dimerization. The autophosphorylation of the cytoplasmic domain initiates a signaling cascade
  that regulates cell proliferation, cell growth, and tumor formation. In this study. . .

head: [‘‘s100a1’’]
relation: associated_with
predictions: protein receptor hydrolase structure process pathway factor complex glycoprotein s100a family
domain oxidoreductase proteinase ligand extracellular signaling calcium apolipoprotein s100

Output:



                                                        63
[‘‘calcium signaling pathway’’]
The rationale behind this output:
Available tokens let us build terms such as:
     • “calcium signaling pathway” (calcium + signaling + pathway)
     • “extracellular signaling” (extracellular + signaling) – too broad
     • “s100a family” – classification, not an association
Other tokens (“glycoprotein,” “oxidoreductase,” etc.) do not represent well-known processes linked to S100A1.

Preference & verification:
“S100A1 modulates intracellular Ca2+ handling and is well-documented to participate in the calcium signaling
pathway, especially in cardiac and skeletal muscle.” This is a concrete biological pathway association that adds
value to the graph.




                                                      64
F      GraphRAG Prompts

                                            E1: GraphRAG Index Prompt
    -Role-
    You are an AI assistant specialized in extracting structured information from biomedical texts to build a
    knowledge graph about diabetes.

    -Goal-
    Given some medical paper abstracts, a predefined list of entity types, and a predefined list of relations, identify
    all entities of those types and the medically meaningful relationships explicitly described among the identified
    entities within the abstract. You should only extract entities that are relevant to diabetes, its complications, and
    comorbidites.

    -Entitiy Types-
    You should extract entities from the following 5 entity types:
    Organism, Anatomical Structure, Manufactured Object, Substance, Conceptual Entity.

    Use the subcategories listed below SOLELY as guidance to help you determine the correct main entity type.
    Only use the 5 main entity types in your output.

    1. Organism: Plant; Fungus; Virus; Bacterium; Archaeon; Eukaryote; Vertebrate; Amphibian; Bird; Fish;
    Reptile; Mammal; Human
    2. Anatomical Structure: Embryonic Structure; Anatomical Abnormality; Congenital Abnormality; Acquired
    Abnormality; Fully Formed Anatomical Structure; Body Part, Organ, or Organ Component; Tissue; Cell; Cell
    Component; Gene or Genome
    3. Manufactured Object: Medical Device; Drug Delivery Device; Research Device; Clinical Drug
    4. Substance: Chemical; Pharmacologic Substance; Antibiotic; Biomedical or Dental Material; Biologically
    Active Substance; Hormone; Enzyme; Vitamin; Immunologic Factor; Receptor; Indicator, Reagent, or Diagnostic
    Aid; Organic Chemical; Nucleic Acid, Nucleoside, or Nucleotide; Amino Acid, Peptide, or Protein; Inorganic
    Chemical; Element, Ion, or Isotope; Body Substance; Food
    5. Conceptual Entity: Idea or Concept; Body System; Body Space or Junction; Body Location or Region;
    Molecular Sequence; Nucleotide Sequence; Amino Acid Sequence; Carbohydrate Sequence; Geographic Area;
    Finding; Laboratory or Test Result; Sign or Symptom; Organism Attribute; Clinical Attribute; Intellectual
    Product; Occupation or Discipline; Organization; Group

    -Relation Types-
    Please only identify the following 35 relations: [‘associated_finding_of,’ ‘associated_morphology_of,’ ‘as-
    sociated_with,’ ‘causative_agent_of,’ ‘cause_of,’ ‘direct_procedure_site_of,’ ‘due_to,’ ‘finding_site_of,’
    ‘focus_of,’ ‘has_associated_morphology,’ ‘has_causative_agent,’ ‘has_clinical_course,’ ‘has_component,’
    ‘has_direct_procedure_site,’ ‘has_direct_substance,’ ‘has_disposition,’ ‘has_entire_anatomy_structure,’
    ‘has_finding_site,’ ‘has_focus,’ ‘has_method,’ ‘has_modification,’ ‘has_part,’ ‘has_pathological_process,’
    ‘interprets,’ ‘inverse_isa,’ ‘is_interpreted_by,’ ‘is_modification_of,’ ‘isa,’ ‘method_of,’ ’occurs_before’, ‘oc-
    curs_in,’ ‘part_of,’ ‘plays_role,’ ‘possibly_equivalent_to,’ ‘same_as’]

    The following provides one example for each type of relation, formatted as ‘head, relation, tail’:
    fetal growth restriction (fgr), associated_finding_of, history of fetal growth retardation
    tumors, associated_morphology_of, neoplastic disease
    neutropenia, associated_with, neutropenic sepsis
    s. epidermidis, causative_agent_of, staphylococcus epidermidis ventriculitis
    chronic kidney disease (ckd), cause_of, renal retinopathy
    gastric fundus, direct_procedure_site_of, laparoscopic fundoplication
    diabetic cardiomyopathy (dbcm), due_to, diabetes mellitus
    endocrine pancreas, finding_site_of, extreme insulin resistance type a
    gait abnormalities, focus_of, prosthetic gait training
    pyoderma gangrenosum, has_associated_morphology, neutrophilic infiltration
    chronic chagas disease cardiomyopathy, has_causative_agent, trypanosoma cruzi
    membranous nephropathy, has_clinical_course, chronic



                                                            65
serum creatinine level, has_component, creatinine
fmt, has_direct_procedure_site, gastrointestinal tract structure
high-intensity statins, has_direct_substance, hmg-coa reductase inhibitor
resveratrol (res), has_disposition, platelet aggregation inhibitor
middle occipital gyrus, has_entire_anatomy_structure, entire lateral occipital gyrus
diabetes retinopathy, has_finding_site, retinal structure
on-line hemodiafiltration, has_focus, renal failure syndrome
islet cell transplant, has_method, surgical transplantation
uric acid, has_modification, calcium urate
anaerobic glycolysis, has_part, pyruvate kinase activity
evans syndrome, has_pathological_process, autoimmune process
endocrine hypertension, interprets, blood pressure
adaptive thermogenesis, inverse_isa, diet induced thermogenesis
serum triglyceride, is_interpreted_by, serum triglyceride levels
tau, is_modification_of, uridine
t cell receptors, isa, antigen receptor
amputation, method_of, cineplastic amputation
renal transplantation, occurs_before, accelerated rejection of renal transplant
paediatric obesity, occurs_in, childhood
bone resorption, part_of, bone remodeling
everolimus (eve), plays_role, antineoplastic therapeutic role
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, possibly_equivalent_to, fatty liver
retinal cotton wool spots, same_as, retinal exudates


-Steps-
1. Identify all entities corresponding to one of the 5 main entity types and relevant to diabetes, using the
subcategory examples as guidance for classification. For each identified entity, extract the following information:
- entity_name: Name of the entity, lowercase
- entity_type: One of the following types: Organism, Anatomical Structure, Manufactured Object, Substance,
Conceptual Entity.
- entity_description: concise description of the entity’s attributes and activities. Format each entity as
(”entity”<|><entity_name><|><entity_type><|><entity_description>)

2. From the entities identified in step 1, identify all pairs of (source_entity, target_entity) that are clearly
related to each other according to the given text, and are medically meaningful. Only use the 35 relationships
that are in the predefined list.

Avoid relationships that are attached to entities that are too general, for example: patients, bodily functions,
parameters, management, optimization. Only keep the relationships that state facts, represent the main idea in
the text, or other important relationships that are in the predefined list. It’s acceptable if some entities identified
in the previous step are not used.

For each pair of related entities, extract the following information: - source_entity: name of the source entity,
as identified in step 1
- target_entity: name of the target entity, as identified in step 1
- relationship: one relation that is in the predefined list, according to the given text
- relationship_strength: a numeric score out of 10 indicating the strength of the relationship between the source
entity and target entity
Format each relationship as
(”relationship”<|><source_entity><|><target_entity><|><relationship_description><|>
<relationship_strength>)

3. Return output in English as a single list of all the entities and relationships identified in steps 1 and 2. Use
## as the list delimiter.

4. When finished, output <|COMPLETE|>




                                                          66
- Constraints and Guidelines
- Strict Textual Grounding: Base all extractions only on the provided medical abstract. Do not use external
knowledge or make assumptions beyond what is written.
- Entity Filtering: Only extract the entities whose type is present in the provided 5 Entity Type, and only
extract entities that are relevant to diabetes, its complications, and comorbidites.
- Relationship Filtering: Extract only the 35 relationships as defined. Exclude all other relationships.
- Delimiter Usage: Strictly adhere to the specified tuple_delimiter within tuples and record_delimiter between
records.



                                      E2: GraphRAG Index Example

Input:


  ######################
  Entity_types: Organism, Anatomical Structure, Manufactured Object, Substance, Conceptual Entity
  Text:
  CMR imaging enables comprehensive detection of myocardial remodeling in patients undergoing TAVR.
  Regression of LV matrix volume as a surrogate for reversible diffuse myocardial fibrosis is accompanied by
  increase of myocardial function and recovery from heart failure. Further data are required to define the
  value of these parameters as therapeutic targets for optimized management of TAVR patients.
  ######################
  Output:

Output:
(”entity”<|>cmr imaging<|>Conceptual Entity<|>A medical imaging technology that allows for the
comprehensive detection of myocardial remodeling.)
##
(”entity”<|>myocardial remodeling<|>Conceptual Entity<|>A pathological process involving changes
in the heart muscle, observed in patients undergoing TAVR.)
##
(”entity”<|>tavr<|>Conceptual Entity<|>Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement, a medical
procedure undergone by patients with myocardial remodeling.)
##
(”entity”<|>regression of LV matrix volume<|>Conceptual Entity<|>The reduction in the volume of
the left ventricular matrix.)
##
(”entity”<|>reversible diffuse myocardial fibrosis<|>Conceptual Entity<|>A condition of the
heart muscle for which the regression of LV matrix volume acts as a surrogate.)
##
(”entity”<|>myocardial function<|>Conceptual Entity<|>The physiological performance of the heart
muscle.)
##
(”entity”<|>heart failure<|>Conceptual Entity<|>A clinical condition from which recovery is
observed along with the regression of LV matrix volume.)
##

(”relationship”<|>myocardial remodeling<|>cmr imaging<|>has_method<|>9)
##
(”relationship”<|>regression of LV matrix volume<|>reversible diffuse myocardial
fibrosis<|>is_interpreted_by<|>9)
##
(”relationship”<|>regression of LV matrix volume<|>myocardial function<|>associated_with <|>10)
##
(”relationship”<|>regression of LV matrix volume<|>heart failure<|>associated_with<|>10)
##
(”relationship”<|>tavr<|>myocardial remodeling<|>occurs_before<|>8)



                                                     67
<|COMPLETE|>

                                        E3: GraphRAG Query Prompt
—Role—
You are a helpful assistant responding to questions about data in the tables provided.

—Data tables—
{context_data}

—Goal—
Generate a response in the specified target format that answers the user’s question using only the information
provided in the tables. Do not use any external knowledge. If any prior knowledge conflicts with the tables,
always rely on the tables as the sole source of truth.
If you cannot get the answer based on the tables, just say so. Do not make anything up.
Points supported by data should list their data references as follows:
         “This is an example sentence supported by multiple data references [Data:             <dataset
         name> (record ids); <dataset name> (record ids)].”
Do not list more than 5 record ids in a single reference. Instead, list the top 5 most relevant record ids and add
“+more” to indicate that there are more.

For example:
         “Person X is the owner of Company Y and subject to many allegations of wrongdoing [Data:
         Entities (5, 7); Relationships (2, 7, 34, 46, 64, +more)].”
where 5, 7, 2, 34, 46, and 64 represent the id (not the index) of the relevant data record.
Do not include information where the supporting evidence for it is not provided.

—Target response format—
Response type: multiple paragraphs.
Provide a concise answer using \boxed{}, select only the correct letter from A, B, C, D. (e.g., \boxed{C})

Reference data points that support your answer using the given format (e.g., [Data: Relationships (2, 3,
4); Entities (35, 36, 37, 39, 55, +more)]). If no relevant information from the table supports your answer,
leave the reference empty (e.g., []).


                                      E4: GraphRAG Context Example
—–Relationships—–
source – (relation) –> target
chemotherapy – (cause_of) –> peripheral neuropathy due to and following chemotherapy
chemotherapy - induced peripheral neuropathy – (due_to) –> administration of antineoplastic
agent
antineoplastic drugs – (associated_with) –> resistance to antineoplastic drug
chemotherapy - induced peripheral neuropathies – (due_to) –> administration of antineoplastic
agent
hematologic malignancies – (isa) –> neoplastic disease
lymphoid leukaemia – (associated_finding_of) –> history of lymphoid leukemia
leukemia – (associated_finding_of) –> history of leukemia
cancer – (focus_of) –> oral chemotherapy for malignant neoplasm
cancer – (associated_with) –> restrictive cardiomyopathy secondary to malignancy
cancer – (associated_with) –> cancer - related fatigue
imatinib – (plays_role) –> antineoplastic therapeutic role
imatinib – (isa) –> antineoplastic agent
vorinostat – (plays_role) –> antineoplastic therapeutic role
nivolumab – (plays_role) –> antineoplastic therapeutic role
rucaparib – (plays_role) –> antineoplastic therapeutic role



                                                        68
nivolumab – (isa) –> antineoplastic agent
rucaparib – (isa) –> antineoplastic agent
antineoplastic agents – (inverse_isa) –> vorinostat
......




                                               69
