                                         Knowledge Graphs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived
                                                  Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


                                                                      Yuval Kansal                                        Niraj K. Jha
                                                                   Princeton University                               Princeton University
                                                              yuvalkansal@princeton.edu                              jha@princeton.edu




arXiv:2601.15160v1 [cs.AI] 21 Jan 2026
                                                                                             A BSTRACT
                                                  Large language models have achieved near-expert performance in structured reasoning domains like
                                                  mathematics and programming, yet their ability to perform compositional multi-hop reasoning in
                                                  specialized scientific fields remains limited. We propose a bottom-up learning paradigm in which
                                                  models are grounded in axiomatic domain facts and compose them to solve complex, unseen tasks.
                                                  To this end, we present a post-training pipeline, based on a combination of supervised fine-tuning and
                                                  reinforcement learning (RL), in which knowledge graphs act as implicit reward models. By deriving
                                                  novel reward signals from knowledge graph paths, we provide verifiable, scalable, and grounded
                                                  supervision that encourages models to compose intermediate axioms rather than optimize only final
                                                  answers during RL. We validate this approach in the medical domain, training a 14B model on
                                                  short-hop reasoning paths (1-3 hops) and evaluating its zero-shot generalization to complex multi-hop
                                                  queries (4-5 hops). Our experiments show that path-derived rewards act as a “compositional bridge,”
                                                  enabling our model to significantly outperform much larger models and frontier systems like GPT-5.2
                                                  and Gemini 3 Pro, on the most difficult reasoning tasks. Furthermore, we demonstrate the robustness
                                                  of our approach to adversarial perturbations against option-shuffling stress tests. This work suggests
                                                  that grounding the reasoning process in structured knowledge is a scalable and efficient path toward
                                                  intelligent reasoning.

                                         1   Introduction
                                         Recent advances in language models have revealed that reasoning capabilities can be significantly enhanced through a
                                         combination of high-quality pretraining, supervised fine-tuning (SFT), carefully tuned reinforcement learning (RL)-
                                         based post-training, and strategic use of additional test-time compute (OpenAI, 2025; Google DeepMind, 2025; Yang
                                         et al., 2025; Muennighoff et al., 2025). The resulting systems achieve near-expert performance in well-structured
                                         domains, such as mathematics and programming, where high-quality data have been curated, reasoning steps are
                                         clear, ground truth is unambiguous, and intermediate verification is tractable (Lightman et al., 2023; Anthropic, 2025).
                                         However, true human-level intelligence in specialized fields requires more than just general pattern matching or
                                         long-form generation; it requires compositional reasoning: the ability to reliably combine axiomatic facts for complex
                                         multi-hop problem solving Kamp & Partee (1995); Fodor (1975). While current large language models (LLMs) excel
                                         when reasoning steps are clear and carefully curated expert data are available, compositional reasoning in high-stakes
                                         scientific domains, where reasoning paths are multi-faceted, remains elusive (Yin et al., 2025; Kim et al., 2025).
                                         To bridge this gap, we argue in favor of a bottom-up learning paradigm: grounding models in axiomatic facts and
                                         then composing these fundamentals into sophisticated domain knowledge. Knowledge graphs (KGs) provide a natural
                                         and promising scaffold for this grounding; they encode entities and relations in a structured, interpretable fashion
                                         that can represent the building blocks of domain knowledge at scale. Recent work Dedhia et al. (2025); Wang et al.
                                         (2024) has shown how high-quality data can be curated from such graphs and used to fine-tune models to obtain better
                                         reasoning traces. However, good static data is just the first step towards mastering the process of composition. Beyond
                                         high-quality data, robust reward design is a key lever for shaping models that can compose axiomatic facts from a
                                         domain to arrive at a logical conclusion.
                                             Preprint. Under review.
              KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning




      Question (3-hop) (Category: Neoplasms) (Difficulty: 2):
      A 58-year-old male presents with a 6-month history of intermittent flushing, diarrhea, and new-onset wheezing. Serum 5-
      HIAA is markedly elevated. Over the past month, he has also developed significant edema and ascites. Laboratory
      investigations reveal low serum albumin, IgG, IgA, and IgM levels. His C3 and C4 complement levels are normal. A CT scan
      reveals a mass in the ileum with liver metastases.
      Which of the following mechanisms is MOST likely contributing to this patient's hypogammaglobulinemia?

      Options:

      A. Direct bone marrow suppression by tumor metastases.

      B. Loss of immunoglobulins due to a protein-losing enteropathy secondary to chronic diarrhea and complement
      hyperactivation.

      C. Decreased immunoglobulin production secondary to tryptophan depletion by the tumor, impairing B-cell function.

      D. Immune complex formation with vasoactive substances released by the tumor, leading to clearance of
      immunoglobulins.

      Correct Answer: B




Figure 1: Compositional Reasoning: A sample 3-hop query that requires systematic traversal of axiomatic triples to
make a grounded, multi-step clinical deduction.


Existing post-training methods, e.g., reinforcement learning from human feedback Ouyang et al. (2022) and direct
preference optimization Rafailov et al. (2023), optimize models to match human preference with final outputs, not
the process that produced them. Proxy reward signals, such as reward length and alignment with expert-written
answers, while useful, fail to account for the composition intricacies needed to answer a complex multi-hop query. In
practice, reward models often conflate superficial correlates (fluency, deference) with quality, thus leading to reward
over-optimization and brittle answers (Shrivastava et al., 2025). In safety-critical domains, the result is a mismatch
between human-liked style and ground-truth validity (Damani et al., 2025; Weng, 2024; Rafailov et al., 2023). Whereas
process supervision (rewarding intermediate steps) has shown promise in mathematics and logic Zhang et al. (2025);
Cui et al. (2025); Wang et al. (2025); Lightman et al. (2023), curating and scaling expert-annotated data for other
domains are notoriously difficult to achieve and nontrivial. This raises a key question: How can we build systems and
reward signals at scale that promote grounded compositional reasoning in multi-hop tasks without relying on
expensive human-in-the-loop annotations?
KGs offer an implicit solution to this scaling problem. In a KG, domain-specific concepts and their relationships
are represented as axiomatic triples (head, relation, tail). Our core insight is that by comparing the reasoning and
assertions of a model during post-training against relevant triples and the chain of axiomatic facts required to solve the
problem, we can turn the match (or mismatch) into a high-quality reward signal. Instead of an answer that “looks good,”
this lets us reward the model to the degree its response is supported by verifiable domain knowledge and implicitly
reward it for correctly composing facts to produce a solution. This is readily scalable without requiring external expert
supervision and further enables us to move away from top-down distillation and ground the model’s reasoning in the
field’s fundamental building blocks.
In this article, we realize this idea through a Base Model → SFT [Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA)]→ RL [Group
Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO)] post-training pipeline that uses a grounded KG to derive a novel reward
signal to enable compositional reasoning (Hu et al., 2022; Guo et al., 2025; Yasunaga et al., 2021). Whereas the
approach can be generally applied, we study it in the medical domain, a field that serves as a rigorous stress test for
compositional reasoning. Medical knowledge inherently requires multi-hop reasoning; a single clinical diagnosis may
require navigating from a patient’s demographics and medical history to symptoms, from those symptoms to a disease,
and finally to a drug (a sample multi-hop query is shown in Fig. 1). By training a Qwen3 14B model Yang et al. (2025)


                                                                 2
              KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


on simple 1-, 2-, and 3-hop reasoning paths derived from a KG, we probe whether it can learn the underlying “logic of
composition” to solve unseen, complex medical queries, ranging from 2- to 5-hop, in the ICD-Bench test suite (Dedhia
et al., 2025). Our results indicate that this grounded SFT+RL approach leads to large accuracy improvements on the
most difficult questions, and remains robust under stress tests, such as option shuffling and ICD-10 category breakdowns
(Organization, 1992). We find that while SFT provides the necessary knowledge base, RL acts as the “compositional
bridge.” We demonstrate that insights learned on an 8B model transfer effectively to a 14B model, outperforming larger
reasoning and frontier models.
Our core contributions can be summarized as follows:

       • A Grounded, Scalable Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR) Pipeline: We introduce
         a scalable SFT+RL post-training framework designed to enable compositional reasoning in models using KGs
         as a verifiable ground truth.

       • KG-Path Inspired Reward: We conduct a thorough investigation to design a novel reward signal derived
         from the KG that encourages compositional reasoning, correctness, and enables process supervision at scale.

       • Compositional Generalization: We demonstrate how training on 1-to-3-hop paths enables a model to
         generalize to difficult and longer 4-, 5-hop questions, significantly outperforming base models and larger
         models.

       • Robustness & Real-World Validation: We stratify our model’s performance by different difficulty levels, on
         real-world medical categories (ICD-10), and its resilience against adversarial option shuffling.


2     Related Work

2.1   Role of SFT and RL in Reasoning

Recent studies have intensely debated the distinct contributions of SFT and RL to model performance (Jin et al., 2025;
Kang et al., 2025; Matsutani et al., 2025). The authors of Chu et al. (2025) argue that “SFT memorizes, RL generalizes,”
claiming that while SFT stabilizes outputs, it struggles with out-of-distribution scenarios that RL can navigate. The
authors of Rajani et al. (2025) characterize GRPO as a “scalpel” that amplifies existing capabilities and SFT as a
“hammer” to overwrite prior knowledge. Our findings align with these dynamics. We use SFT to instill atomic domain
knowledge in the model and RL to amplify compositional logic required to connect such knowledge.
Contrary to the findings in Yue et al. (2025), our results on unseen 4-, 5-hop queries demonstrate that when rewards are
grounded in relevant axiomatic primitives, RL can elicit novel compositional abilities beyond the baseline. This echoes
the findings in Yuan et al. (2025) that demonstrate that RL can teach models to compose old skills into new ones; we
validate this in a high-stakes real-world domain rather than a synthetic one.


2.2   RL on KGs

Traditional applications of RL on KGs, e.g., Das et al. (2017) and Xiong et al. (2017), primarily focus on traversing
graph structures to complete missing triples (link prediction) or find missing entities. The authors of Lin et al. (2018)
further refine this approach with reward shaping to improve multi-hop reasoning, but still largely confine themselves to
the task of graph completion instead of open-ended question answering in a real-world setting. In more recent works, the
authors of Wang et al. (2024) propose “Learning to Plan,” where KGs guide the retrieval process for retrieval-augmented
generation systems, and those of Yan et al. (2025) introduce RL from KG feedback to replace human feedback with KG
signals. While promising, these approaches often limit the role of the KG to retrieval planning or simple search tools
for alignment.
Our work differs fundamentally by centrally positioning KGs as a dense process verifier for real-world multi-hop
reasoning. The authors of Khatwani et al. (2025) use LLMs as a reward model for KG reasoning, but found the approach
to be brittle, with poor transfer to downstream diagnostic tasks. We attribute this to the lack of a compositional training
curriculum; by combining the bottom-up data curation of Dedhia et al. (2025) with treating the KG as a reward model to
derive path-aligned signals, we overcome this limitation. Furthermore, unlike Gunjal et al. (2025) that uses unstructured
LLM-created rubrics as rewards, or rule-based Logic-RL Xie et al. (2025), we derive our signal directly from grounded
axiomatic paths of the KG.


                                                            3
              KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


3     Preliminaries
3.1   Notation and RL for Language Models

We treat an LLM as a stochastic policy πθ that maps a query q [multiple-choice question (MCQ) task] to a distribution
over possible completions y. Each completion y comprises a reasoning trace r (chain-of-thought) Wei et al. (2022) and
a final answer â (spanning A-D). Each training task q is associated with a ground-truth answer a∗ and a ground-truth
                           L
KG path P = (hi , ri , ti )i=1 (see Section 4.1).
A composite scalar reward function R(y), derived from the KG, is used to score a generated completion y (see Section
4.4). The RL objective is to maximize the expected reward under the prompt distribution:
                                            J(θ) = Eq∼D Ey∼πθ (·|q) [R(y)]
Whereas the response y is produced token-by-token, we treat the entire completion as a single trajectory for reward
assignment, following common practice in LLM post-training.
Policy updates are performed using GRPO, a popular proximal policy optimization-like optimizer Schulman et al.
(2017) that drops the critic and estimates advantages at the group level using normalization (Guo et al., 2025). See
Appendix E for details of our hyperparameter configuration for the SFT and RL stages.

3.2   SFT Followed by RL

Our training recipe follows the widely adopted Base Model → SFT → RL framework for improving LLMs. First, an
SFT stage initializes the policy (base LLM) to produce high-quality, KG-grounded reasoning traces. A subsequent
RL stage refines the policy directly to optimize the reward signal and enable compositional reasoning. Formally, SFT
minimizes the negative log-likelihood on a supervised dataset consisting of question-answer (QA) tasks paired with
reference reasoning traces and answers.
In our experiments, the SFT stage provides broad KG coverage, whereas the RL stage is deliberately small: a design
choice motivated by observed instability in an RL-from-scratch approach and because targeted RL with good reward
can enable compositional abilities when built atop SFT initialization (Section 4.2, Appendix G have more details).

3.3   Medical KG: Unified Medical Language System (UMLS)

We instantiate our framework on a standard biomedical KG based on UMLS Bodenreider (2004), which encodes
canonical medical ontology in a structured graph format. Each fact is represented as a triple (head, relation, tail)
                                       L
and multi-hop paths P = (hi , ri , ti )i=1 serve as axiomatic compositional primitives used to generate QA tasks and
path-alignment reward signals, and evaluate correctness. Full QA task generation and reward-design choices/strategies
are described in the following section.

4     Methodology
This section describes our data construction and training pipeline. We emphasize the sequential decisions we make:
dataset choices, SFT warm start, RL budget, reward design, and experiments that guide these choices. Our training
pipeline is designed to transition a base model from broad competence to deep, compositional medical-domain reasoning.
Fig. 2 presents an overview of our pipeline.

4.1   Data Construction and Axiomatic Grounding

Given our testbed that involves compositional reasoning and to ensure our model learns true depth rather than mere
pattern matching, we adopt the data-generation and curation pipeline from Dedhia et al. (2025), which enables scalable
generation of multi-hop reasoning questions grounded in a medical KG. The structured representation of medical
concepts, such as diseases, drugs, signs, and mechanisms, in a KG as (head, relation, tail) triples enables question
generation directly from verifiable and grounded KG paths. Questions are generated in natural language in an MCQ
format using a backend LLM by traversing n-length paths within the KG, where n represents the number of “hops”
required to link a starting node to a final node. This enables precise control over the compositional complexity of
each query. Furthermore, each question is paired with a rich reasoning trace and a ground truth path: a sequence of
(head, relation, tail) triples that constitutes a verifiable logical chain. The pipeline helps stratify questions by hop
length, difficulty, and ICD-10 category, and enforces strict separation between the training and test sets at the path and
entity levels to avoid leakage.


                                                            4
              KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning




           Training Phase                                                                Inference Phase
          Short Hops (1-3)                                                               Long Hops (4-5)


                                      Base Model       SFT (LoRA)        RL (GRPO)
                1-Hop


                                              SFT+RL Training Phase

                                                                                                 4-Hop


                2-Hop                          (High-quality reasoning
                                                traces, Compositional
                                                     reasoning)




                                                                                                 5-Hop
                                                       KG-Path Inspired +
                                                       correctness reward               Improved generalization on
               3-Hop                                          signal                 difficult, unseen 4/5 hop tasks




Figure 2: SFT+RL pipeline overview: Schematic of the pipeline from SFT to KG-grounded RL. While SFT enables
domain-specific grounding, the path-derived reward signal during RL provides the process supervision necessary for
compositional reasoning.


We generate a training set of 24,660 QA tasks designed to ensure maximum node coverage across the KG (Yasunaga
et al., 2021). For evaluation, we use ICD-Bench, a non-overlapping test set of 3,675 questions (Dedhia et al., 2025).
Importantly, the training set consists of 1-3 hop paths, whereas ICD-Bench includes 2-5 hop path tasks across 15
ICD-10 categories to test zero-shot compositional generalization at different difficulty levels [1 (very easy) - 5 (very
hard)]. More analysis of overlaps between the training and test sets is presented in Appendix D.
Our training pipeline consists of three stages: Base Model → SFT (LoRA) → RL (GRPO). This design reflects our
central hypothesis that compositional reasoning emerges most reliably when models are first grounded in rich reasoning
traces via supervised learning and then tuned using scalable process-aligned rewards derived from the KG paths. We
emphasize that all training data and rewards are derived from the same KG to ensure consistency between training and
evaluation.

4.2   RL Alone is Insufficient

A core finding of our work is that the Zero-RL approach, applying GRPO directly to the base LLM, is insufficient for
deep domain expertise at our model scale. The model requires an understanding of the domain axioms before it can
learn to compose. Starting from the base model (Qwen3 8B), we apply GRPO directly using subsets of training data:
5k, 10k, and all 24.66k examples. Across these settings, we find that while RL improves performance relative to the
base model, it does not consistently outperform SFT-only training on the base model. Interestingly, the budget of 5k
examples yields the strongest results among all other settings, suggesting how large-scale vanilla RL without proper
grounding is insufficient for compositional behavior, motivating the use of SFT for an initial warm start.
Based on these observations, we use 5k examples in the RL stage and the remaining 19.66k in the SFT stage. The base
model is fine-tuned using LoRA on 19.66k examples, followed by GRPO on the remaining 5k examples as per the
SFT+RL pipeline.
See Appendix A, B for detailed ablations with the Zero-RL and SFT+RL pipelines on the Qwen3 8B model, respectively.
See Appendix H for our GRPO training prompt.


                                                            5
              KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


4.3   Reward Design Exploration for Compositional Reasoning

A central goal and a novel contribution of this work is to design scalable reward signals during training that enable
compositional reasoning beyond surface-level understanding. Towards this end, we conduct extensive ablation studies
using a combination of four distinct reward signals to determine which best fosters verifiable composition:

       • Binary Correctness (Rbin ): A simple outcome-based signal that rewards the final answer.
       • Similarity (Rsim ): A distillation-based reward that measures the Jaccard similarity between the model output
         and an expert reasoning trace (generated by Gemini 2.5 Pro during data curation).
       • Thinking Quality (Rthink ): A reward designed to score the thinking quality and length of the generation.
       • Path Alignment (Rpath ): A novel reward that scores the model based on the coverage of the ground-truth
         KG triples in the model response.

We conduct a systematic exploration by evaluating a combination of these rewards, always including Rbin (+1 for
correctness, 0 otherwise) as a minimal signal. Empirically, we discover that Rthink is often unstable and leads to reward
hacking, generating inefficacious chains. Rsim also proved sub-optimal, suggesting distillation rewards over-optimize
aesthetic mimicry rather than true logical composition.
Our findings highlight the power of simplicity: The combination of path alignment and binary correctness provides the
strongest signal for composition. Whereas Rbin optimizes correctness, Rpath rewards the model for identifying and
applying the axiomatic facts (triples) required to compose the correct solution. To further strengthen the outcome signal,
we replace the simple Rbin with negative sampling reinforcement Zhu et al. (2025), which penalizes incorrect generations
by upweighting the negative reward, thereby encouraging the model to explore alternative/correct trajectories.

4.4   KG-Grounded Reward Formulation

To provide a robust reward signal to enable composition, we develop a composite reward that balances outcome
correctness with path-level alignment grounded in the KG. Let the model generate a response y for a question q with
the reasoning trace r and a final answer â. For each QA task, there is a ground truth answer a∗ and a ground-truth KG
                        L
path P = (hi , ri , ti )i=1 , where L is the path length. The total reward is then a combination of the two rewards:
                                  Rtotal (y) = Rbin (â, a∗ ) + Rpath (r, P )
Binary Correctness Reward: This provides a minimal but necessary supervision signal on the final answer.

                                                               if â = a∗
                                                     
                                                ∗      α,
                                     Rbin (â, a ) =
                                                       −β, otherwise
where α, β > 0 and β > α. This asymmetric design ensures stable learning by reinforcing exploration of correct
alternate paths. We use α = 0.1, β = 1 in accordance with investigations by (Zhu et al., 2025).
Path Alignment Reward (KG-grounded): The primary technical innovation is Rpath , which provides automated and
scalable process supervision by evaluating whether the reasoning trace of the model aligns with the ground-truth KG
path P during RL post-training. We first tokenize and normalize the reasoning trace r to extract a set of textual tokens,
T (r). We derive a corresponding set of path tokens, T (P ), from the ground-truth path P , representing the entities in P .
The core signal is path coverage:
                                                              | T (r) ∩ T (P ) |
                                          coverage(r, P ) =
                                                                   | T (P ) |
We include a minimum-hit constraint that requires alignment with at least two distinct path entities to discourage trivial
matches and promote logical composition. We apply an additional repetition penalty to reduce reward hacking and
avoid linguistic collapse. The final reward is defined as:
                                 Rpath (r, P ) = min(γ1 · coverage(r, P )
                                                 + γ2 · I(|T (r) ∩ T (P )| ≥ 2), Rmax ),
scaled by a repetition penalty factor, ϕrep , and clipped to a fixed maximum. We use γ1 = 1.2, γ2 = 0.3, Rmax = 1.5.
The total reward, Rtotal , is process-level, grounded, and compositional. It is readily scalable and easily verifiable as a
result of the grounding in the KG. Furthermore, unlike similarity-based distillation or AI-based rubric rewards Gunjal
et al. (2025), alignment is scored against true domain structure rather than stylistic mimicry. We present a formal
formulation of Rsim and Rthink in Appendix C.


                                                             6
                 KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


4.5   Scaling and Benchmarking

We evaluate our pipeline on the Qwen3 8B model before scaling the findings to the 14B variant without modification.
The 14B model trained on our pipeline not only generalizes to 2- and 3-hop tasks, but also to 4-and 5-hop tasks with
remarkable efficacy, surpassing much larger frontier models. In addition to overall accuracy, we stratify performance by
hop length, difficulty level, ICD-10 category, and robustness under the option-shuffling stress test.

5     Results
Setup: We initially evaluate three systems: Base Qwen3 14B model, model trained using LoRA on the full training set
(24,660 QA tasks), and our proposed SFT+RL pipeline (SFT on 19,660 tasks followed by GRPO on the remaining
5k tasks) based on leveraging the KG-derived reward. We do not report results for models trained using the Zero-RL
approach, described in Section 4.2, since all of them performed worse than SFT on the full dataset (see Appendix A for
details). All evaluations use the held-out test ICD-Bench test set (3,675 tasks) to validate whether path-derived signals
truly enable compositional reasoning. Finally, we evaluate our SFT+RL model against larger frontier and reasoning
models. See Appendix F for sample model responses of our final Qwen3 14B SFT+RL model.

5.1   Scaling Composition: From Short-Hop Training to Long-Hop Reasoning

The primary claim of this work is that KGs function as implicit reward models, and grounding the model reasoning in
path-derived signals enables it to learn the underlying logic of composition rather than regurgitating information seen
during training.

                         95
                                                                               Generalization
                         90                                                 (unseen complexity)

                         85                                                                           +11.1%



          Accuracy (%)
                         80
                         75
                         70
                         65                                                        Base Model
                                                                                   SFT Only
                         60                                                        SFT+RL
                              2                  3                      4                         5
                                        Number of Reasoning Hops
Figure 3: Accuracy by Hop Length: Our SFT+RL model not only outperforms baselines on 2-3 hop tasks but exhibits
a positive performance gradient on unseen 4-, 5-hop reasoning tasks, validating the “compositional bridge” enabled by
path-aligned rewards.

Path-derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning: Whereas the model was exposed to 1-, 2-, and 3-hop paths
during the SFT+RL training phase, it remained totally naive to tasks involving 4-, 5-hop reasoning. As shown in Fig. 3,
the SFT+RL model demonstrates substantially stronger generalization to longer paths, achieving a notable gain of
7.5% on unseen 4-hop and 11.1% on unseen 5-hop questions relative to the SFT-only approach. This improvement
is not attributable to exposure to longer chains, since the training and evaluation distributions are identical across
all models. Instead, it reflects the effect of path-derived signals introduced during RL. By rewarding assertions that
align the model directly with the ground-truth KG path, the model learns the logic of composition. Importantly, the
generalization gap between the SFT-only and SFT+RL approaches widens as hop-length increases. This is a hallmark of


                                                           7
                 KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


genuine compositional learning. The KG-derived reward signal (Rpath ) enables the model to decompose long-horizon
reasoning into verifiable steps and compose reasoning beyond the complexity observed during training.

5.2   Robustness to Tasks Involving Reasoning Depth

A significant challenge in medical reasoning is maintaining integrity as the complexity of tasks increases. Aggregate
performance metrics often obscure model failure on long-tail high-difficulty scenarios, where deep reasoning is
paramount. We assign difficulty ratings from 1 (very easy) to 5 (very hard) Dedhia et al. (2025) to each ICD-Bench
question and assess model performance as a function of question difficulty.

                         100                                                               Base Model
                                                                                           SFT Only
                                                                                           SFT+RL
                         80



          Accuracy (%)
                         60

                         40

                         20

                          0
                                    1          2             3               4               5
                               (Very Easy)   (Easy)       (Medium)         (Hard)       (Very Hard)
                                                      Difficulty Level
Figure 4: Accuracy by Difficulty Level: Whereas the Base Model’s reasoning collapses as task complexity increases,
the SFT+RL pipeline exhibits robustness, maintaining a consistent lead over the SFT-only baseline across all levels.

Dominance in High-Complexity Tasks: The results shown in Fig. 4 demonstrate that the SFT+RL pipeline, grounded
in path-derived signals, provides the most significant gains as task complexity increases. On Level-5 tasks, the base
model accuracy collapses to 19.94%, indicating worse-than-random-guess accuracy in complex clinical scenarios.
Whereas the SFT-only approach improves this to 48.93%, our SFT+RL model achieves 56.75%, nearly tripling the base
model performance.
Consistency across all Difficulty Levels: On Level-1 tasks, our model reaches a near-ceiling accuracy (93.49%)
and the performance gap remains robust across difficulty levels, with the SFT+RL model consistently maintaining a
7-10% lead over the SFT-only model. This demonstrates that by using the KG as an implicit reward model, we raise
the performance floor for the most complex queries. On Level-5 tasks, where even large frontier models struggle,
maintaining over 56% accuracy is a testament to how path-aligned rewards do more than just stylistic inference; they
enable the model to reliably compose multi-step chains.
5.3   ICD-10 Category Analysis: KG-grounded Gains Are Broadly Distributed

To connect our empirical evaluation to real-world, clinically meaningful structures, we follow the categorization
introduced in Dedhia et al. (2025) that groups ICD-Bench questions into 15 ICD-10 categories in the data curation step.
This classification lets us evaluate the breadth of our approach, enabling us to measure whether improvements of the
SFT+RL model are concentrated in a few medical sub-domains or distributed across practical specialties.
The analysis, visualized in Fig. 5, reveals that our SFT+RL pipeline consistently achieves the highest accuracy and
maintains a substantial lead over the SFT-only baseline across all medical categories. Some of the most significant
improvements occur in high-stakes areas such as “Blood and Immune System Diseases” and “Circulatory System
Diseases,” where diagnostic reasoning often requires complex, multi-hop evidence composition. This is consistent with
our design choice to derive the reward from KG paths; the path-alignment reward can assign a meaningful intermediate
signal and better shape compositional behavior.


                                                          8
              KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning




                          Ear
                  Congenital
                 Neoplasms
                 Circulatory
              Pharmacology
                          Eye
             Musculoskeletal
              Blood/Immune
                   Infectious
                 Respiratory
                         Skin
                  Endocrine
                    Digestive
                     Nervous
                                                                                     SFT Only
              Mental Health                                                          SFT+RL (Ours)
                                0           5            10            15            20           25
                                           Improvement over Base Model (%)
Figure 5: Accuracy by ICD-10 Category: Path-aligned rewards consistently improve performance across all 15
medical sub-domains.


5.4   Robustness to Format Perturbation

A common failure mode for LLMs is reliance on superficial cues, e.g., the order of options and answer in a multiple-
choice list, rather than the true logical content and chain of reasoning. To evaluate the robustness of our models against
such positional bias, we subject them to Stress-Test 3 (option shuffling) Gu et al. (2025). In this test, the order of
incorrect distractor options is randomized while keeping the correct answer choice constant.


                                    Table 1: Analysis of Option Format Perturbation.
                                M ETHOD            S TANDARD     S HUFFLED    D ELTA (∆)
                                SFT-O NLY           75.95%        74.91%        −1.04%
                                SFT+RL (O URS )     83.62%        82.45%        −1.17%


The results in Table 1 demonstrate a remarkable degree of robustness of our approach compared to frontier models
analyzed in the literature. Whereas leading systems, such as GPT-5 and Gemini-2.5 Pro, have been shown to suffer
performance drops of 4-6% under similar perturbations (in text-only medical contexts) Gu et al. (2025), our models
maintain nearly stable performance with a negligible drop of ∼ 1%.
Importance of High-Quality Data: This resilience highlights a fundamental axiom of machine learning: use of
high-quality, grounded data is paramount. Our data curation and training pipeline incentivizes the model to identify
the correct answer based on a verifiable reasoning path rather than shortcut patterns seen during unstructured training.
The fact that even the SFT-only model trained on high-quality traces exhibits such stability suggests that grounding the
model in structured domain axiomatic knowledge is as critical as subsequent RL optimization. By grounding the model


                                                            9
                 KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


and ensuring it learns true logical composition, we move closer to systems capable of genuine domain competence
rather than “illusion of readiness.”


5.5   Algorithmic Efficiency vs. Scale: Surpassing Frontier Models

One of our central claims is that careful reward design and bottom-up data curation can enable compositional reasoning
that outperforms top-down brute-force scaling. To validate this, we compare our 14B SFT+RL model against two
distinct classes of benchmarks: (1) large frontier models (GPT-5.2, Gemini 3 Pro) that represent the ceiling of generalist
zero-shot reasoning, and (2) QwQ-Med-3 (32B), a domain-expert model distilled for medical reasoning.


                         95
                                       Simpler                                    Complex
                                                                                                  +19%
                         90
                                                                          +10%
                              +7%
                         85


          Accuracy (%)
                                                  +7%
                         80

                         75

                         70         GPT-5.2
                                    Gemini 3 Pro
                                    SFT+RL (14B, Ours)             14B params vs larger frontier models
                         65
                               2                    3                       4                       5
                                            Number of Reasoning Hops
Figure 6: Accuracy Comparisons against Frontier Models by Hop Level: Whereas the accuracy of generalist giants
decays on longer chains, our 14B SFT+RL model achieves its highest accuracy on unseen 5-hop queries, validating the
KG as a superior supervisor for complex composition.



Superiority over Frontier Models: We evaluate the zero-shot performance of the model against leading generalist
models in Fig. 6. Our results demonstrate that grounding a smaller model in a domain’s axioms enables it to surpass
larger, generally trained giants at complex reasoning tasks. We also note a striking trend: Whereas GPT-5.2 and Gemini
3 Pro maintain respectable performance on shorter hops, their accuracy stagnates or declines as the hop count increases.
In contrast, our model exhibits a positive compositional gradient and achieves its highest accuracy (89.33%) on the
5-hop queries. This supports our claim that KG-grounded path-derived signals teach the model how to compose axioms,
not just standard pattern matching.
Surpassing Expert-distilled Scale (SFT-Only): Finally, we compare our model with the QwQ-Med-3 model presented
in Dedhia et al. (2025), which was trained on a similar data distribution. For a fair comparison, we use the majority-
voting (n = 16) metric, matching the aggregation metric used in their study (see Table 2).
Whereas the QwQ-Med-3 model holds a slight advantage on lower-difficulty tasks, which typically rely on factual
recall, our model successfully bridges the recall-reasoning gap. By using the KG as an implicit reward model, we
enable a smaller architecture to “out-reason” a much larger model. This confirms our premise that while scale is a
powerful tool for breadth of knowledge, path-aligned rewards are the true bridge to deep compositional reasoning.


                                                           10
              KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning



                           Table 2: Performance by difficulty level (using majority voting).

                                  D IFF .   Q W Q-M ED -3 32B   O URS -14B       ∆
                                    1           96.75%           94.23%       −2.52%
                                    2           83.79%           85.63%       +1.84%
                                    3           79.33%           80.33%       +1.00%
                                    4           70.56%           71.50%       +0.94%
                                    5           49.69%           59.05%       +9.36%



6   Discussion
The ideas and results presented in this work highlight a fundamental shift in how we approach the development of
expert-level reasoning. By using a KG as an implicit reward model, we demonstrate how bottom-up primitives in a
domain can serve as highly scalable, verifiable process supervisors. Unlike contemporary human-in-the-loop process
supervision, which is prohibitively expensive and infeasible to scale to millions of reasoning chains across domains, our
path-derived reward signal provides an automated, scalable axiomatic grounding mechanism.
Furthermore, our findings reinforce the basic axiom of machine learning: Good data are paramount! We show that
when models are trained with proper axiomatic grounding, they develop a robust skill for compositional reasoning
beyond simple factual recall. This is most evident by our model’s ability to surpass much larger generalist giants. While
brute-force scaling continues to dominate the search for general intelligence, our work suggests a more efficient path
towards building superintelligent systems: building small, specialized models that master composition within their
respective domains.
Finally, our reward design mechanism is inherently scalable and domain-agnostic. Any scientific or technical field
that can be represented as a structured KG (from organic chemistry to case law) is a candidate for this pipeline. As
domain KGs continue to expand in coverage and fidelity, they offer a practical route to building systems that reason
from first principles rather than surface correlations or simple pattern matching. We posit this work as an early step
toward scalable, verifiable domain-specific superintelligence, and we encourage future research to explore richer graph
structures, broader domains, and tighter integration between symbolic knowledge and neural architectures to build
better reasoning systems.

7   Conclusion
We introduced a simple, general idea: Treat KGs as implicit reward models and use path-derived rewards in a scalable
fashion to teach models how to compose domain primitives into longer reasoning chains. We combined SFT with
a compact RL stage and a KG path-aligned reward (plus correctness) to synthesize models that can generalize from
1-3-hop training to unseen 4-5-hop problems, improve baseline accuracy on the hardest tasks, and remain robust under
format perturbations. Our recipe yields consistent gains over an SFT-only approach and can outperform much larger
models, validating that good grounded data and reward design, not just scale, are central to compositional reasoning.
Although we have successfully validated our claims within the medical domain, we acknowledge that this is only a
starting point. We encourage the community to further investigate how structured KGs can be leveraged as reward
supervisors to build the next generation of superintelligent systems.

Acknowledgments
The experiments reported in this paper were performed on the computational resources managed and supported by
Princeton Research Computing, Princeton AI Lab, and the Princeton Language and Intelligence Initiative at Princeton
University.




                                                           11
              KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


References
Anthropic. Claude Opus 4.5 System Card Technical Report, 2025. URL https://assets.anthropic.com/m/
   64823ba7485345a7/Claude-Opus-4-5-System-Card.pdf.
Bodenreider, O. The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS): Integrating Biomedical Terminology. Nucleic acids
   research, 32:D267–D270, 2004.
Chu, T., Zhai, Y., Yang, J., Tong, S., Xie, S., Schuurmans, D., Le, Q. V., Levine, S., and Ma, Y. SFT Memorizes, RL
   Generalizes: A Comparative Study of Foundation Model Post-Training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.17161, 2025.
Cui, G., Yuan, L., Wang, Z., Wang, H., Li, W., He, B., Fan, Y., Yu, T., Xu, Q., Chen, W., Yuan, J., Chen, H., Zhang,
   K., Lv, X., Wang, S., Yao, Y., Han, X., Peng, H., Cheng, Y., Liu, Z., Sun, M., Zhou, B., and Ding, N. Process
   Reinforcement Through Implicit Rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01456, 2025.
Damani, M., Puri, I., Slocum, S., Shenfeld, I., Choshen, L., Kim, Y., and Andreas, J. Beyond Binary Rewards: Training
   LMs to Reason About Their Uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.16806, 2025.
Das, R., Dhuliawala, S., Zaheer, M., Vilnis, L., Durugkar, I., Krishnamurthy, A., Smola, A., and McCallum, A. Go for a
   Walk and Arrive at the Answer: Reasoning Over Paths in Knowledge Bases Using Reinforcement Learning. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1711.05851, 2017.
Dedhia, B., Kansal, Y., and Jha, N. K. Bottom-up Domain-specific Superintelligence: A Reliable Knowledge Graph is
   What We Need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.13966, 7 2025.
Fodor, J. A. The Language of Thought, volume 5. Harvard University Press, 1975.
Google DeepMind. Gemini 3 Pro Model Card, November 2025. URL https://storage.googleapis.com/
   deepmind-media/Model-Cards/Gemini-3-Pro-Model-Card.pdf. Technical Report.
Gu, Y., Fu, J., Liu, X., Valanarasu, J. M. J., Codella, N. C., Tan, R., Liu, Q., Jin, Y., Zhang, S., Wang, J., et al. The
   Illusion of Readiness in Health AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.18234, 2025.
Gunjal, A., Wang, A., Lau, E., Nath, V., Liu, B., and Hendryx, S. Rubrics as Rewards: Reinforcement Learning Beyond
   Verifiable Domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.17746, 2025.
Guo, D., Yang, D., Zhang, H., Song, J., Zhang, R., Xu, R., Zhu, Q., Ma, S., Wang, P., Bi, X., et al. Deepseek-R1:
   Incentivizing Reasoning Capability in LLMs Via Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
Hu, E. J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., Wang, L., Chen, W., et al. LoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation
   of Large Language Models. In Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations, 1(2):3, 2022.
Jin, H., Luan, S., Lyu, S., Rabusseau, G., Rabbany, R., Precup, D., and Hamdaqa, M. RL Fine-Tuning Heals OOD
   Forgetting In SFT. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.12235, 2025.
Kamp, H. and Partee, B. Prototype Theory and Compositionality. Cognition, 57(2):129–191, 1995.
Kang, F., Kuchnik, M., Padthe, K., Vlastelica, M., Jia, R., Wu, C.-J., and Ardalani, N. Quagmires in SFT-RL
   Post-Training: When High SFT Scores Mislead and What to Use Instead. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01624, 2025.
Khatwani, S., Cheng, H., Afshar, M., Dligach, D., and Gao, Y. Brittleness and Promise: Knowledge Graph Based
   Reward Modeling for Diagnostic Reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.18316, 2025.
Kim, Y., Jeong, H., Chen, S., Li, S. S., Lu, M., Alhamoud, K., Mun, J., Grau, C., Jung, M., Gameiro, R., Fan, L., Park,
   E., Lin, T., Yoon, J., Yoon, W., Sap, M., Tsvetkov, Y., Liang, P., Xu, X., Liu, X., McDuff, D., Lee, H., Park, H. W.,
   Tulebaev, S., and Breazeal, C. Medical Hallucination in Foundation Models and Their Impact on Healthcare. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2503.05777, 2025.
Lightman, H., Kosaraju, V., Burda, Y., Edwards, H., Baker, B., Lee, T., Leike, J., Schulman, J., Sutskever, I., and Cobbe,
   K. Let’s Verify Step by Step. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.20050, 2023.
Lin, X. V., Socher, R., and Xiong, C. Multi-Hop Knowledge Graph Reasoning With Reward Shaping. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1808.10568, 2018.
Matsutani, K., Takashiro, S., Minegishi, G., Kojima, T., Iwasawa, Y., and Matsuo, Y. RL Squeezes, SFT Expands: A
   Comparative Study of Reasoning LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.21128, 2025.
Muennighoff, N., Yang, Z., Shi, W., Li, X. L., Fei-Fei, L., Hajishirzi, H., Zettlemoyer, L., Liang, P., Candès, E., and
   Hashimoto, T. B. s1: Simple Test-Time Scaling. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
   Language Processing, pp. 20286–20332, 2025.
OpenAI. Introducing GPT-5.2. https://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-5-2/, 2025. Accessed: 2026.
Organization, W. H. International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems 10th Revision
  (ICD-10). World Health Organization, 1992.


                                                           12
              KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama, K., Ray, A.,
  et al. Training Language Models to Follow Instructions with Human Feedback. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
Rafailov, R., Sharma, A., Mitchell, E., Ermon, S., Manning, C. D., and Finn, C. Direct Preference Optimization: Your
  Language Model is Secretly a Reward Model. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.
Rajani, N., Gema, A. P., Goldfarb-Tarrant, S., and Titov, I. Scalpel vs. Hammer: GRPO Amplifies Existing Capabilities,
  SFT Replaces Them. arXiv preprint, 2025. Preprint.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and Klimov, O. Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Shrivastava, V., Awadallah, A., Balachandran, V., Garg, S., Behl, H., and Papailiopoulos, D. Sample More to Think
  Less: Group Filtered Policy Optimization for Concise Reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.09726, 2025.
Wang, G., Li, J., Sun, Y., Chen, X., Liu, C., Wu, Y., Lu, M., Song, S., and Abbasi-Yadkori, Y. Hierarchical Reasoning
  Model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.21734, 2025.
Wang, J., Chen, M., Hu, B., Yang, D., Liu, Z., Shen, Y., Wei, P., Zhang, Z., Gu, J., Zhou, J., Pan, J. Z., Zhang, W., and
  Chen, H. Learning to Plan for Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models from Knowledge Graphs. In Findings
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, pp. 7813–7835. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2024.
Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q. V., Zhou, D., et al. Chain-of-Thought Prompting
  Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837,
  2022.
Weng, L.        Reward Hacking in Reinforcement Learning.                  https://lilianweng.github.io/posts/
  2024-11-28-reward-hacking/, 2024. Lil’Log blog post.
Xie, T., Gao, Z., Ren, Q., Luo, H., Hong, Y., Dai, B., Zhou, J., Qiu, K., Wu, Z., and Luo, C. Logic-RL: Unleashing
  LLM Reasoning with Rule-Based Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14768, 2025.
Xiong, W., Hoang, T., and Wang, W. Y. DeepPath: A Reinforcement Learning Method for Knowledge Graph Reasoning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06690, 2017.
Yan, L., Tang, C., Guan, Y., Wang, H., Wang, S., Liu, H., Yang, Y., and Jiang, J. RLKGF: Reinforcement Learning
  from Knowledge Graph Feedback without Human Annotations. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: ACL 2025, pp. 6619–6633, 2025.
Yang, A., Li, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., Yu, B., Gao, C., Huang, C., Lv, C., et al. Qwen3 Technical
  Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388, 2025.
Yasunaga, M., Ren, H., Bosselut, A., Liang, P., and Leskovec, J. QA-GNN: Reasoning with Language Models and
  Knowledge Graphs for Question Answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.06378, 2021.
Yin, M., Qu, Y., Yang, L., Cong, L., and Wang, M. Toward Scientific Reasoning in LLMs: Training from Expert
  Discussions via Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19501, 2025.
Yuan, L., Chen, W., Zhang, Y., Cui, G., Wang, H., You, Z., Ding, N., Liu, Z., Sun, M., and Peng, H. From f (x) and
  g(x) to f (g(x)): LLMs Learn New Skills in RL by Composing Old Ones. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25123, 2025.
Yue, Y., Chen, Z., Lu, R., Zhao, A., Wang, Z., Song, S., and Huang, G. Does Reinforcement Learning Really Incentivize
  Reasoning Capacity in LLMs Beyond the Base Model? arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13837, 2025.
Zhang, Z., Zheng, C., Wu, Y., Zhang, B., Lin, R., Yu, B., Liu, D., Zhou, J., and Lin, J. The Lessons of Developing
  Process Reward Models in Mathematical Reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.07301, 2025.
Zhu, X., Xia, M., Wei, Z., Chen, W.-L., Chen, D., and Meng, Y. The Surprising Effectiveness of Negative Reinforcement
  in LLM Reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01347, 2025.




                                                          13
              KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


A     Zero-RL and Reward Ablation Studies on Qwen3 8B
In this section, we provide the empirical details of our experiments with the “Zero-RL” approach (applying RL directly
to the base model without a prior SFT phase). These ablations were instrumental in determining our final training scale,
pipeline design, and reward configuration.

A.1   Zero-RL Performance and Scaling

We evaluate the performance of the Qwen3 8B base model using the GRPO algorithm across three data scales: 5k,
10k, and 24.66k examples. For each scale, we test four reward configurations: (1) path alignment (path overlap), (2)
Jaccard similarity (distillation), (3) binary correctness, and (4) all rewards combined (see Table 3). All experiments are
performed on the Qwen3 8B model using 8 H100 NVIDIA GPUs.
Note that we always include the binary correctness reward as a minimal signal.

                 Table 3: Ablation study on reward components across training scales on Qwen3 8B.

                       T RAINING S IZE      R EWARD        ACCURACY       ∼T RAINING T IME ( HRS )
                                     0     BASELINE          64.98%                  –
                                          PATH A LIGN .      67.51%                 12
                                   5K    JACCARD S IM .      68.03%                 12
                                            B INARY          69.36%                 12
                                          PATH A LIGN .      64.24%                 24
                                         JACCARD S IM .      65.74%                 24
                                  10 K
                                            B INARY          67.56%                 24
                                         A LL R EWARDS       68.44%                 24
                                          PATH A LIGN .      68.41%                 65
                                         JACCARD S IM .      65.77%                 65
                               24.66 K
                                            B INARY          70.18%                 65
                                         A LL R EWARDS       68.44%                 65

Key Observations:

       • SFT Requirement: Whereas Zero-RL provides a marginal improvement over the base model, no configuration
         reaches the performance levels of the SFT-only baseline (70.86%) or our final SFT+RL model (∼ 82%). This
         confirms that the model requires a grounded factual foundation from SFT before it can effectively leverage
         RL for compositional reasoning. In the final SFT+RL pipeline, path alignment, along with binary correctness
         (with upweighted negative reward), provides the best and most reliable signal.
       • Scale vs. Efficiency: Performance gains from 5k to 24.66k examples are minimal (e.g., a ∼0.8% gain for
         binary correctness reward) while significantly increasing training time from 12 to 65 hours. This justifies our
         decision to set the RL stage to use a high-quality 5k subset of our final pipeline.
       • Reward Stability: The binary correctness reward remains the most stable signal in the Zero-SFT setting.
         The distillation-based rewards are prone to reward hacking and stylistic mimicry without providing superior
         reasoning abilities.

A.2   GRPO on LoRA Parameters Only

We also explore a variant of the pipeline where we perform SFT followed by GRPO, with updates limited only to the
LoRA modules. This configuration yields an accuracy of 66.75% on the 8B model. The significantly lower performance
compared to our full SFT+RL results suggests that compositional reasoning requires more extensive/aggressive weight
updates during RL than those afforded by the restricted LoRA-only approach.




                                                           14
                KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


B    SFT+RL Ablation Studies on Qwen3 8B
This study investigates the synergy between the binary reward and path alignment reward, and provides the final missing
link by ablating the specific reward components used in the RL stage. Whereas Appendix A focuses on the Zero-RL
settings, the following experiments demonstrate the impact of reward designs on the model that has already undergone
SFT. We conduct these ablations on the Qwen3 8B model to efficiently identify the optimal configuration for the larger
14B SFT+RL pipeline.
We specifically evaluate the addition of negative reinforcement Zhu et al. (2025) by penalizing the model more for
incorrect final answers than correct reasoning paths. As shown in Table 4, the combination of path-derived signals and
negative binary reward provides the most robust reasoning improvements, significantly outperforming configurations
that rely on binary signals alone or a combination of all rewards.

Table 4: Ablation study on reward components with the SFT+RL training pipeline (8B Model). All RL runs are
conducted for 5k steps following a 19.66k SFT baseline.

                     T RAINING S ETUP       R EWARD C ONFIGURATION                 ACCURACY (%)
                     SFT BASELINE           -                                          70.86%
                                            PATH A LIGNMENT O NLY                      79.29%
                                            PATH A LIGNMENT + B INARY                  68.03%
                     19.66 K SFT + 5 K RL   B INARY O NLY (N ORMAL )                   79.46%
                                            N EGATIVE B INARY O NLY                    79.54%
                                            A LL R EWARDS                              55.21%
                                            PATH A LIGN . + N EGATIVE B INARY          82.20%

Key Insights:

       • The Synergy of Negative Reinforcement: Consistent with the findings of Zhu et al. (2025), we observe that
         “Normal” binary rewards (positive reinforcement only) can be unstable when combined with path-aligned
         rewards. Transitioning to negative binary rewards while rewarding valid intermediate paths yields our highest
         accuracy of 82.20%.
       • The “All Rewards” Failure: Attempting to combine all reward signals (path alignment, Jaccard similarity,
         normal binary, and thinking quality) leads to a significant performance collapse (55.21%). This suggests that
         over-optimizing the reward signal can lead to conflicting gradients or reward hacking, where the model fails to
         optimize for the primary reasoning task.
       • Effect of the Path Alignment Signal: Even without outcome-based binary rewards, path alignment only
         provides a substantial ∼9% boost over the SFT baseline. This confirms that the KG itself acts as a sufficient
         implicit reward model to guide the model towards better compositional reasoning.




                                                          15
              KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


C     Additional Reward Function Formulations
In addition to the path-alignment reward, Rpath , and the binary correctness reward, Rbin , we investigate two alternative
reward functions for RL experiments: semantic answer similarity (distillation-based reward) (Rsim ) and thinking quality
(Rthink ). Whereas these functions provided some learning signals, they are ultimately less effective than path-derived
rewards in enabling deep compositional reasoning.

C.1   Semantic Answer Similarity Reward (Rsim )

The semantic answer similarity (or distillation) reward, Rsim , is designed to distill the reasoning patterns of the SFT
model by rewarding semantic overlap between the model-generated reasoning and the ground truth answer reasoning
trace.
The reward is calculated using the Jaccard similarity of normalized token sets:
                                                   |Tmodel ∩ Ttarget |
                                          Rsim =                       × ϕrep ,
                                                   |Tmodel ∪ Ttarget |
where Tmodel is the set of unique tokens from the thinking trace of the model, Ttarget is the token set of the ground
truth reasoning text (distilled from a larger LLM), and ϕrep is a repetition penalty factor used to discourage repetitive
generation. This function encourages the model to mention the correct clinical entities and mechanisms associated with
the target answer, though it does not explicitly verify the logical validity of the connections between those entities.

C.2   Thinking Quality Reward (Rthink )

The thinking quality reward, Rthink , is designed to encourage the model to produce well-organized, stepwise reasoning.
It evaluates the response based on its adherence to logical formatting cues. It is calculated as a weighted sum of three
structural components:

       • Structure (50%): A binary indicator of whether the reasoning trace exceeds a minimum length threshold (20
         characters).
       • Step-wise Keywords (30%): A normalized count of logical-thinking indicator words such as “first,” “then,”
         “therefore,” and “finally.”
       • Enumeration (20%): A score based on the presence of numbered lists (e.g., “1.,” “2.”), which often indicate
         a systematic breakdown of a multi-hop clinical diagnostic problem.

In addition, we employ a penalty, ϕrep , to discourage repetitive output. Whereas Rthink shows initial promise in
improving the readability of the model outputs, it often leads to reward hacking in contrast to the rigorous logical
traversal induced by path-derived reward signals.




                                                           16
                                            KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


D                                 Train-Test Split Overlap Analysis
A critical concern in any reasoning-based benchmark is the potential for data leakage or memorization. As per the
design of our data curation pipeline, which builds upon the methodology established in Dedhia et al. (2025), each
question created by traversing a KG path is unique. Per design, arriving at a correct answer requires explicit reasoning
involving all intermediate edges and nodes in the path, rather than simple pattern matching.
We intentionally allow partial overlap of individual nodes or single triples between the training and test sets to ensure
the benchmark exercises broad coverage of medical concepts. To more concretely address concerns regarding the
influence of partial knowledge overlap, we performed a rigorous analysis of our model performance on the test set
categorized by the longest consecutive matching subsequence of triples found in any training question. This match can
start at any position in either the training or test path. The distribution and corresponding accuracy metrics are detailed
in Figs. 7, 8, respectively.
                                                           2719                                                              100
                                                         (74.0%)
                                                                                                                                                      83.8%                 84.6%
                           2500                                                                                                     82.0%            (n=2719)              (n=441)
                                                                                                                                   (n=478)                                                        78.4%
                                                                                                                             80                                                                   (n=37)




Number of Test Questions
                           2000
                                                                                                                             60


                                                                                                              Accuracy (%)
                           1500

                                                                                                                             40
                           1000

                                        478                                    441
                            500       (13.0%)                                (12.0%)
                                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                  37                                                                                    Overall Accuracy: 83.6%
                                                                                                (1.0%)
                              0                                                                                               0
                                        0                  1                    2                 3                                  0                  1                    2                      3
                                                Max Triple Overlap with Any Training Question                                                Max Triple Overlap with Any Training Question

Figure 7: Number of KG Triples shared with the Train-                                                         Figure 8: Accuracy by Number of Overlapping KG
ing Set                                                                                                       Triples
Only 1.0% of test questions have a full 3-triple chain match. Since our training set is restricted to a maximum of 3-hop
reasoning tasks, this ensures that the vast majority of our benchmark consists of structurally unique reasoning tasks.
Furthermore, there is no clear trend in accuracy as overlap increases. This suggests that performance is not significantly
predicted by the presence of familiar triple sequences. Interestingly, the 3-overlap category exhibits slightly lower
accuracy (78.4%) than the 0-overlap category (82.0%). This further demonstrates that our model internalizes the logic
of composition rather than memorizing specific paths.
Whereas the majority of questions share at least one triple with the training set, note that the ICD-Bench test set contains
only 2-5-hop questions. This requires the model to perform novel composition even when individual building blocks
have been previously seen in different contexts.




                                                                                                         17
             KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


E     Training Hyperparameters and GRPO Configuration
In this section, we detail the specific hyperparameter configurations used for both the SFT (Table 5) and RL (GRPO)
(Table 6) stages of our pipeline.

E.1   Hardware Compute

All experiments are conducted using high-performance GPU clusters. The 8B model runs are executed on a node
equipped with 8× NVIDIA H100 GPUs. For the 14B parameter model, we use 8× NVIDIA H200 GPUs to accommo-
date for increased memory requirements and ensure efficient throughput in the RL phase. DeepSpeed is employed as
the inference engine to optimize model sharding, memory management, and logging during GRPO.

E.2   SFT Stage

For the SFT stage, we use the LoRA method Hu et al. (2022). The hyperparameters are kept constant across both model
scales.

                                        Table 5: Hyperparameters for SFT.

                                          H YPERPARAMETER        VALUE
                                          L O RA R ANK (r)         16
                                          L O RA A LPHA (α)        16
                                          L O RA D ROPOUT         0.05
                                          L EARNING R ATE       2 × 10−4


E.3   RL (GRPO) Stage

Given the high cost of model generation in full-parameter GRPO, we optimize per-device efficiency while maintaining
a stable learning signal by using a constant learning rate with a warmup period. The choice of num generations = 2
is made to balance memory requirements with completion length. We found that low temperature is essential for
maintaining logical consistency and diversity.

                                  Table 6: Hyperparameters for GRPO training.

                               H YPERPARAMETER                       VALUE
                               N UM G ENERATIONS (G)                     2
                               BATCH S IZE ( PER DEVICE )                1
                               L EARNING R ATE                      8 × 10−6
                               LR S CHEDULE                   C ONSTANT W / WARMUP
                               T EMPERATURE (T )                        0.6
                               T OP - P                                 0.9
                               O PTIMIZER                            A DAM W
                               P RECISION                             BF16
                               M AX C OMPLETION L ENGTH                1792
                               R EPETITION P ENALTY                    1.15




                                                        18
                KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


F     Sample Model Responses

Next, we present representative samples of the output of our 14B SFT+RL model on complex, multi-hop medical
queries from the ICD-Bench test set. These examples illustrate how our model effectively composes several 1-hop facts
to solve a 3-hop and a 5-hop problem, respectively.



     Detailed Compositional Reasoning — Category: Neoplasms — Difficulty: 1 — Num Hops: 3
     Question: A 6-month-old infant presents with a rapidly growing mass in their left flank. Imaging reveals a large renal mass
     suspicious for atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (ATRT). Family history is significant for a maternal grandfather with multiple
     cutaneous neurilemmomas diagnosed in his 60s. Genetic testing confirms a germline pathogenic variant in SMARCB1 in
     the infant. Which of the following secondary findings would warrant the MOST urgent investigation in this patient?
     Options:
    A. Mild macrocephaly with normal development.
    B. Small, subcutaneous lipomas noted on physical exam.
    C. Bilateral sensorineural hearing loss identified on newborn screening.
    D. Widening of the mediastinum on chest X-ray following a persistent cough.


       Step-by-Step Reasoning (< think >)
       Okay, let’s break this down. We have a 6-month-old baby with a likely ATRT, a pretty aggressive brain tumor in
       this context, and the genetic testing confirms a germline SMARCB1 mutation. This mutation is associated with
        Rhabdoid Tumor Predisposition Syndrome (RTPS), which significantly increases the risk of certain cancers, includ-
       ing the ATRT seen here.
       Now we need to look at the secondary findings and figure out which one needs the most urgent attention. Let’s go
       through the options:
       • A. Mild macrocephaly with normal development: While macrocephaly can be seen in some genetic syndromes,
         including RTPS, mild macrocephaly isn’t typically an immediate life-threatening sign, especially when development
         is normal. It’s something to note but might not be the most urgent thing to investigate right now compared to other
         possibilities.
       • B. Small, subcutaneous lipomas: Like macrocephaly, lipomas can occur in RTPS, but small lipomas are generally
         benign and don’t usually require urgent evaluation unless they are growing rapidly or causing symptoms. They don’t
         point to an immediate, critical problem.
       • C. Bilateral sensorineural hearing loss identified on newborn screening: Hearing loss is a known feature of some
         SMARCB1 related conditions. However, it’s usually detected early (like via newborn screening) and while important
         for the child’s development, it’s not typically an immediate medical emergency requiring the same level of urgency
         as a potential airway or cardiac issue.
       • D. Widening of the mediastinum on chest X-ray following a persistent cough: This is the big one. A
           widening mediastinum, especially in the context of a persistent cough, is highly suspicious for a thymoma.
         Thymomas are tumors located in the anterior mediastinum. While not always malignant, they can be associated with
         myasthenia gravis, hypogammaglobulinemia, and sometimes other paraneoplastic syndromes. Crucially, large or
         malignant thymomas can compress airways or the superior vena cava, leading to respiratory distress or superior vena
         cava syndrome, which is a medical emergency requiring urgent evaluation and potential intervention.
       Considering the infant already has a severe malignancy (ATRT) and a confirmed SMARCB1 mutation, the possibility
       of a second, potentially rapidly progressive and life-threatening condition like a thymoma, which can cause immediate
       symptoms (breathing difficulty, facial/arm swelling, neck vein distension), makes the mediastinal widening the most
       critical finding demanding urgent investigation. The respiratory compromise from a thymoma is a time-sensitive issue.
       Therefore, the widening mediastinum is the most pressing concern that needs investigation urgently.



       Ground Truth Knowledge Graph Path:
                      may be allelic with                      is a risk factor of          may cause
         RTPS Type 1 −−−−−−−−−−→ Schwannomatosis Type 1 −−−−−−−−−→ Neurilemmoma −
                                                                                −−−−−
                                                                                    → Mediastinal Enlargement


     Final Answer: D      ✓ Correct




                                                                   19
            KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning



 Detailed Compositional Reasoning — Category: Neoplasms — Difficulty: 5 — Num Hops: 5
 Question: A 17-year-old female presents with worsening pain and swelling in her left distal femur. Imaging reveals a
 lytic lesion with periosteal reaction highly suggestive of Ewing’s sarcoma. She is started on a multi-agent chemotherapy
 regimen including Etoposide. Several weeks into treatment, she develops significant mucositis and general malaise, leading
 to difficulty maintaining adequate oral nutrition. Her oncologist is considering adjunctive therapies to improve her nutritional
 status and muscle mass while carefully considering potential risks and interactions. Which of the following factors should
 be given MOST consideration when making this decision?
 Options:
A. The patient’s reported history of childhood asthma and potential for steroid-induced bronchospasm.
B. The documented presence of a BRCA1 mutation in a distant relative and the risk of increased malignancy with certain
   growth factors.
C. The potential for teratogenic effects of some anabolic steroids, given the need for effective contraception.
D. The need to avoid medications that could exacerbate chemotherapy-induced neuropathy, potentially hindering physical
   rehabilitation.

  Step-by-Step Reasoning (< think >):
  Okay, let’s break this down. We have a 17-year-old patient with Ewing’s sarcoma, getting chemotherapy that includes
   Etoposide. She’s having side effects like mucositis and general malaise, making it hard to eat. The team is thinking
  about adding something to help her nutrition and build muscle mass, likely an anabolic steroid or similar agent. We need
  to figure out which factor is most important to consider when choosing this adjunctive therapy.

  1. Understand the Core Problem: The patient needs help with nutrition and muscle mass due to chemo side effects.
  Potential solutions might involve anabolic steroids or similar compounds. We need to pick the most critical factor
  influencing this decision.
  2. Analyze Option A (Childhood Asthma): The patient has childhood asthma. Anabolic steroids, like Oxymetholone,
  can be used to treat certain types of pulmonary issues, including sometimes asthma. So, there’s a potential therapeutic
  benefit here. However, the primary concern with asthma and steroids is usually bronchospasm, which is a risk with
  corticosteroids (like Prednisone), not typically the main issue directly with anabolic steroids, although some anabolic
  steroids can have corticosteroid effects or cause fluid retention. While important for overall care, it’s probably not the
  most critical factor specifically for choosing an adjunctive therapy for nutrition/muscle mass itself, especially compared
  to direct risks of the therapy.
  3. Analyze Option B (BRCA1 Mutation): The BRCA1 mutation is relevant for cancer predisposition (increases risk
  of breast, ovarian cancer). While some growth factors (like Peginesatide) have been associated with risks in BRCA1
  mutation carriers, this is a very specific scenario and doesn’t directly relate to the common adjunctive agents used for
  nutritional support or muscle mass building, which are often anabolic steroids. It’s highly unlikely to be the most critical
  factor for this patient’s specific situation.
  4. Analyze Option D (Neuropathy): The patient is on Etoposide, which can cause neurotoxicity (like peripheral
  neuropathy). Adding another drug that could potentially worsen this (maybe some agents used for nutrition/muscle mass
  have neurotoxic potential, or the patient’s overall condition makes them more sensitive) is definitely a consideration for
  quality of life and rehabilitation. It’s a valid concern, but is it the most critical? Probably not, especially when compared
  to other potential issues.
  5. Analyze Option C (Teratogenic Effects): The patient is 17 years old. While not yet of childbearing age, it’s crucial
  to consider future fertility. Anabolic steroids, such as Oxandrolone, are known to be teratogenic, meaning they can
  cause birth defects. This is a serious risk if the patient were to become pregnant, either during treatment or in the near
  future after stopping treatment. Given her age and the potential long-term implications of treatment side effects, the
  risk of teratogenesis stands out as a major, long-term safety concern that must be addressed. If an anabolic steroid is
  considered, effective contraception is absolutely essential, and the teratogenic potential is a primary reason why it needs
  careful consideration and management. This risk is significant and directly related to the choice of therapy, making it
  arguably the most critical factor to consider.
  6. Synthesize and Conclude: Comparing the options, the teratogenic potential (Option C) is the most critical factor.
  Why? Because the patient is young (17), and the potential for future pregnancy exists. Anabolic steroids, which might
  be considered for her muscle mass and nutrition, are teratogenic. This is a serious long-term health risk that needs
  careful planning and discussion. While neuropathy (D) is a concern, and asthma (A) has some relevance, the potential for
  teratogenesis is a major safety issue directly impacting the choice and management of therapy for a young female patient.

  Therefore, the factor that should be given the MOST consideration is the potential for teratogenic effects.




                                                               20
         KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning




  Ground Truth Knowledge Graph Path (5 Hops):
                                                          may treat
                                           Ewing’s sarcoma −−−−−→ Etoposide
                               may treat                   may treat
                              −−−−−→ Brain neoplasms −−−−−→ Hydroxycarbamide
                              may contraindicate          may contraindicate
                              −−−−−−−−−−→ Pregnancy −−−−−−−−−−→ Oxandrolone


Final Answer: C   ✓ Correct




                                                         21
              KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


G     SFT+RL Pipeline Algorithm
To provide a clear, formal overview of our training process, we present the SFT+RL Pipeline in Algorithm 1. This
algorithm details the transition from high-quality grounded SFT to path-aligned RL using the GRPO framework.

Algorithm 1 Grounded Compositional Reasoning Pipeline (SFT+RL)
    Input: Base model θbase , Knowledge graph G, Training set D = {(Qi , Ai , Pi , Ri )}, where Pi is a KG reasoning
    path and Ri is the reasoning trace.
    Output: Compositional reasoning model θRL .
    {Stage 1: Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT)}
    Initialize θSF T ← θbase
    for each (Q, A, P, R) ∈ DSF T do
       Fine-tune θSF T to minimize LSF T = − log P (A, R|Q; θSF T )
       {Model learns atomic facts and reasoning structure}
    end for
    {Stage 2: Path-Aligned Reinforcement Learning (RL)}
    Initialize θRL ← θSF T
    for each question Q ∈ DRL do
       Generate G independent outputs {O1 , O2 , . . . , OG } from θRL
       for each output Og do
          Extract reasoning triples T̂g from ⟨think⟩ block
          Compute binary reward Rbin based on final answer correctness
          Compute path reward Rpath by verifying triples in T̂g against P
          R(Og ) = α · Rbin + β · Rpath {Weighted reward signal}
       end for
       Compute Advantage and update θRL using GRPO objective
    end for




                                                         22
              KGs are Implicit Reward Models: Path-Derived Signals Enable Compositional Reasoning


H    Model Prompt
We employ a structured prompting strategy to enforce the separation of internal reasoning and final answer selection.
This structure is critical for the path alignment reward, Rpath , as it enables our reward function to isolate the think
block for axiomatic triple extraction. The exact prompt is shown in Fig. 9.


      System Prompt: A conversation between user and assistant. The user asks a single-choice Multiple Choice Question,
      and the assistant solves it using step-by-step reasoning. Please answer the multiple-choice question by selecting only
      one from option A, option B, option C, or option D. The assistant first thinks through the problem systematically, then
      provides the explanation and final answer. Use <think>...</think> tags for internal reasoning, then provide the
      answer in the format — Final Answer: .
      Task Instructions: Please provide complete and accurate answers with clear reasoning. The answer must only be a
      single letter from A, B, C, D.
      Format Enforcement:
      <think> [Reasoning Path] </think>
      Final Answer: [Letter]


                                      Figure 9: Prompt template for GRPO training.




                                                               23
