I survived the worst year of my life…and it’s time to tell the real story. I’ve let my name be dragged
through the mud for 365 days while grieving the loss of someone I thought I was going to spend
forever with. So here it is:


The Day The Stars Fell


I work as a paramedic in a high volume city…so let me preface this with saying, I absolutely LOVE my
job. This field has brought so many ups and downs, as well as new perspectives on life, amazing
people with even bigger gifts of wisdom and encouragement. It has been one of the best decisions I
have ever made.


Some days we get to relax and enjoy the bright and rewarding moments this life has to offer, and
there are times the city turns into pure chaos and we are pushed to our breaking points every hour.


The life of a first responder isn’t for the weak, and it takes an even stronger person to be by our side
and love us through the rollercoaster of our careers. I was one of the lucky ones that found a man
that adored me through all of this. He was also a paramedic and the understanding and compassion
and love that flowed through our relationship was unmatched. I was given a gift I never expected to
walk into my life.


Nolan and I became friends shortly after he came to work at the same company, and we hit it off.
Both of us were going through some hard times and became a quiet support system checking in on
each other regularly. The laughs and inside jokes came almost immediately and there was a genuine
bond formed. We talked about life, the job, fears, dreams, and our own personal struggles. Mental
health check ins became a regular part of our routine. Our relationship was strictly platonic and a
beautiful friendship was formed.


December of 2023, I got a call from Nolan pretty distraught about a bad situation he was dealing
with at home. I offered to help in anyway. A few days later, we were sitting on my bedroom floor
both in tears making a pinky promise that we would reach out if our own brains became our worst
enemies and we would get each other through it to avoid the worst possible scenario. Come to find
out, without telling each other, that night we both set the others contacts to an emergency bypass
so that it would ring through the do not disturb setting so we were always available in an
emergency.


Shortly after, Nolan got the keys to his new apartment, and our relationship developed into a
romantic one. We were inseparable, and never spent a night apart. He was one of the few men in
my life to show me true genuine love and care with a gentleness I never could have imagined
existed. I wanted for nothing, and he treated me like a queen while simultaneously loving my 3 kids
on top of it. Selfless and kind with a heart the size of Texas doesn’t even begin to describe the man
I was building a life with. His blue eyes could light up an entire room on the darkest days, the
mischievous grin he threw out often was one that was contagious. Our relationship is what I would
still call “perfect”, he spoiled me, I catered to him, and we never argued. It was the kind of example
of love I always wanted for my kids.


On the morning of March 19th, we had our first argument. We were both devastated, and it resulted
in Nolan packing his stuff up and leaving our house to head to his apartment in the mindset that our
relationship was over. I called Nolan’s partner, and one of our best friends to check on him.


Our argument carried over to March 20th, and Nolan was making comments that had me concerned
for his mental state. Unfortunately I had nothing I could show the police that would force their hand
to take him in to be evaluated. I just KNEW something was wrong and did my best to keep talking to
him while I was on shift. Early that afternoon I received a text that was more than just concerning, I
immediately reached out to a manager and said that I needed a favor and it was for one of our own. I
got no response. In a panic, I reached out to his partner and he raced up to Nolan’s apartment. Our
texts continued, and shortly after I received a phone call from his partner reporting that FWPD was
there and that Nolan was barricaded in his apartment with firearms. In that moment I felt like the air
had been violently sucked from my lungs and I was in pure shock.


I immediately called our supervisor on duty that day and begged him to put my ambulance out of
service and clear me to go to Nolan’s apartment. I explained that I was the one he had been
reaching out to for help and I was more than likely the only person that would be able to deescalate
the situation. I was told that I could be put out of service to get him on the phone but that was all
they could do.


I called Nolan several times before he finally answered. The minutes felt like an eternity until I heard
his voice. He was very clearly intoxicated and expressing some heavy emotions about the harder
aspects of life and not feeling good enough. My heart was shattering into a million pieces listening
to the man I loved so whole heartedly tell me he was giving up.


I grabbed my partners phone, called our supervisor back and pleaded with him again to send me up
there to get him. I argued the fact that I am a credentialed provider in the system and run these calls
all the time. He denied my request again.


I explained to Nolan I was doing everything I could to get to him and that we would get through this
together. While still on the phone with me, I heard him yell through the door to the police officers
“Kayla is the only one I’ll leave here peacefully with, she’s a paramedic and she’s on shift right now,
get her here!”


Shortly after I was receiving calls and texts from a close friend that was speaking with CIT because
they were asking her who I was to him. I sent her a text back explaining he said he’d only go with me
to the hospital and that I needed PD to convince my supervisors to clear me in, all while keeping
Nolan on the phone and listening to him fall apart for over an hour. Shortly after, Nolan switched our
call to FaceTime. I watched him lay on the floor in the fetal position sobbing and apologizing with his
phone propped up against something. I promised him I’d stay with him no matter what and that we
were in this together. Watching the man I was building a life with and saw my entire future with at
his breaking point is something I cannot even begin to describe.


A third call to my supervisor was made, and at this point I couldn’t keep my emotions in check. I
yelled through the phone about dropping the ticket on me as the primary medic if they had to and
that PD was asking for me. Within seconds the call was dropped on my unit and we were en route
running lights and sirens faster than we could blink.


Nolan rolled to his stomach and laid on the floor, and his physical and mental exhaustion was visible.
I told him I was on my way and I needed him to hold on just a little while longer. He said “babygirl
you’re not gonna make it” and it felt like time slowed down the way it does in movies. I begged,
bargained, and pleaded with him to stay with me and that I couldn’t do this life without him.


Meanwhile my amazing partner had turned into Mario Andretti and was doing everything he could to
weave through rush hour traffic to get us to Nolan.


I couldn’t take my eyes off my phone screen. Nolan barely lifted his head, and his last words to me
were “My soul is tied to yours, and I’ll find you in the next life. I’m sorry I failed you.”


At 1644 on March 20th he pulled the trigger and ended his own life, and my entire world stopped in
that moment.


I remember feeling like my heart was being crushed by an iron fist, the entire outside universe fell
away as I listened to the other end of that call. I counted 7 snoring respirations, and one final sigh.
That was Nolan Fansler’s last breath as I took my first in what felt like years. That first breath was
followed by the most terrifying scream I’ve ever heard leave my own body.


It felt like time sped up to normal again. I was crying, and yelling, and begging him to wake up. I
remember trying to crawl out of the passenger seat with nowhere to go, kicking the dashboard, and
clutching my chest trying to ease the pain. My phone kept ringing with an unknown number, then
my partners phone rang, and the rest of the ride to Nolan’s apartment is a blur. I screamed the
entire 30 min drive until my throat felt like sandpaper.


When we arrived at the apartment complex we were met by a supervisor vehicle and escorted to
where the incident command was. My door was opened and an officer began asking me questions. I
relayed that I had witnessed the fatal shot fired and confirmed he was deceased. The officer asked
if I was still on FaceTime and gently took my phone. I pleaded with him not to hang up the call
because I promised Nolan I wouldn’t leave him. Other officers helped me out of the ambulance and I
immediately asked where my best friend was that had been sent to check on Nolan earlier that day.


I began walking through the parking lot and I felt like I was treading knee deep through molasses.
My entire body felt foreign, my vision began to tunnel, and I could sense the panic rising like water
on a sinking ship. I spotted Aaron right as he was running towards me. My knees buckled as the only
familiar person caught me seconds before I hit the ground. I screamed, and sobbed, and begged
him to tell me it wasn’t real. I remember him easing us both to the concrete and grabbing my face
telling me that I had more info than he did. He held me tight enough to keep me from shattering into
a million pieces right there while I continued to sob.


Roughly an hour went by, with several other things taking place that I only remember bits and
pieces of in my shocked state. At some point I had made it to the back of the ambulance and sat
there with nothing but silent tears and a glazed over expression from what I’ve been told.


My supervisor stepped inside the box and approached me with caution asking questions like “do
you know where you are” and “do you remember what happened”, he knelt down next to me and
grabbed my hand with tears streaming down his face. I was so confused and hyper aware at the
same time. He told me they had done everything they could, but Nolan was gone. All I remember
saying was “I know.”


Matt from OMD arrived on scene and stepped into the truck with me. Seeing a man I’ve have looked
to as a friend and mentor since my time began at this company was a wave of relief and comfort. He
hugged me and let me cry into his shoulder and told me I was going to be okay. That HE was going
to make sure I was okay.


Some more time passed, and an officer brought my phone back down from the apartment. He had
kept his word and never ended the call. To that officer…I can’t thank you enough for that small
gesture, you helped me keep one of my final promises to my other half.


I blankly stared at my phone and told Aaron I couldn’t do it. I couldn’t hang up the phone, it felt too
final. My best friend looked me in the face and said “I got you”, he gently pried the phone from my
hands and ended the call. That was it. That was the moment it was final. Nolan was gone.


At some point my phone started ringing and it was my dad. Aaron took over and explained the
situation to him. I was handed the phone, and while Matt hugged me, I’ll never forget the
desperation coming from my dad, begging me “please tell me you’re going to survive this.” I assured
him I would, even though I never admitted to him that in that exact moment I felt like I was actually
dying. My heart felt so heavy and so painful I thought it was going to give out at any moment, but as
a parent myself I decided to spare him that devastating detail.


Shortly after a few members of our upper management team arrived on scene and I was met with
what felt like inconvenience and annoyance. I was told I needed to report back to our deployment
center in the ambulance and check in my narcotics. When I pushed back on this and begged to go
home since I was literally a 15 min walk from my house, the argument ensued with the manager and
I was denied my request due to having narcotics on me, I was still on the clock, and a debrief was
required. At that point Matt stepped in and informed the manager that he was a mobile safe and that
my medications could be signed over to him and he was also capable of clocking me out so I could
go straight home.


I was faced with more push back and informed I needed to report to the north deployment center
for the debrief. I once again requested to go straight home. And by “request”, I mean more so told
them I was going home regardless whether they approved it or not and I would deal with the
repercussions later. Was I correct in my response? No, I was still in shock and an emotional mess.
We came to a compromise and decided the debrief could be done at my house with everyone
involved and every one of our closest friends showed up with a vibe of storming the castle to wrap
me up and keep me grounded. Kaitlin, my sweet baby girl, arrived on scene at some point and made
all of this happen to take what stress she could off my already overflowing plate.


While we figured out the game plan to get everyone to my house, I was approached by a second
manager and he offered his condolences with a softness I appreciate more than I could express.
When he asked me what I needed, my only response was “I need Nolan’s mom’s phone number. She
deserves to hear this from someone that loved him and not a random officer.” The manager
hesitated, but began to look up Nolan’s emergency contact info. He looked up from him his phone
and said “Kayla I’m so sorry…”, before he could finish the statement I raised my voice saying
“What?!?! What now?!?!” I watched his sadness cross his face like a wave. “Kayla, Nolan made you
his emergency contact.” Pure disbelief is the only way to describe the feeling. My knees buckled
and Kaitlin grabbed me before I hit the ground for a second time that day.


Let me preface this next part with some insight…as first responders our humor tends to lean on the
dark side. It’s a coping mechanism that some perceive as cold hearted. Nolan had a very dark sense
of humor, just like the rest of us. It’s how we make it through the hard stuff.


Surrounded by FWPD, and two of my closest friends on either side of me, someone made a
comment about Nolan and how heartbreaking the situation was. The filter from my brain to my
mouth malfunctioned and I just looked up and sighed, followed by “Jokes on you Nolan, you’re not
getting out of this relationship that easy, I’ll Amazon a ouija board and have that b***h here by
tomorrow.” When I realized I had accidentally used my outside voice I looked around to a sea of
shocked faces. At that point I broke. I had no tears left and the pain was so surreal…I laughed. I
hysterically laughed until I sobbed and the panic began to hit me like a freight train. I’m fairly
certain, everyone around me was convinced I was having a nervous breakdown. There’s a solid
chance they were right.


At some point Kaitlin took me home, how I got there is still a bit hazy. I walked in to my best friend/
roommate and she dropped everything to hug me while we both sobbed. I still couldn’t believe this
was happening. Meanwhile, my teenage son was in his room oblivious to the fact that I was about to
rock his little world. Aaron walked me down to my son’s room and we sat with him and told him that
Nolan had been in a work accident. I wasn’t sure how to explain the concept of suicide when my
children had only ever seen him happy and loving and basically acting like a big kid. My sweet baby
boy looked at me with shock, and the pain I felt for him as his mother is immeasurable. Nolan was
his buddy, his confidant, his protector, and the only positive male role model that had spent every
day with him. My son wouldn’t speak to anyone for days following the news of Nolan’s death.


At some point, Matt arrived at my house and had food delivered for all of us. Shortly after, another
upper level manager showed up and the debrief was underway. More so, chaos erupted with so
much emotion, anger, sadness, and for some of us pure unadulterated rage. We were asked
something along the lines of how we felt our leadership team handled situations with employees.
Everything we all had been holding back for months was released from a cage in a way our manager
was pinned to the chair and forced to hear our cries for help and change. Not only was the way
Nolan’s situation handled utterly absurd to all of us considering I personally had a timeline of
roughly 3.5 hours of begging for help for him, but every indiscretion towards field employees was
laid out. From sexual harassment, to unsafe ambulances that had wheels fall off on the highway
during transport, to working us into the ground no matter the cost to us physically or mentally. The
tears were not just of grief, but that of anger and mistreatment that has been ignored and swept
under the rug for countless years…it all came to the surface that night. We were PISSED. All of these
things had also taken a serious toll on Nolan’s mental health, as well as our own.


As the room went quiet for a moment and we all just processed the situation as a whole and how
drained every one of us was, the most powerful comment echoed through the room. The man it
came from has always been cool, calm and collected. He clearly had enough at that point…”How
many more f**king paramedics have to die for y’all to give a s**t?” The silence following that was
deafening. We sat there and watched our manager scrambling for words on how to respond, and
ultimately ended up defending the company and stating how much they valued their employees.
Honestly, I tuned out the rest of what she was saying and went into a daze ignoring the surrounding
chaos that was riling up again.


When things began to calm down, Matt came over to me and put his hand on my shoulder. He asked
me if there was anyone he could call for me, or if I had a counselor I was already seeing. I handed
him my phone with my absolute angel of a counselor’s info pulled up. He stepped out to arrange to
have me seen immediately.


There was a conversation with the manager about me having bereavement time and I was told that
because I was not legally Nolan’s wife their hands were tied. It didn’t matter that I was on shift,
didn’t matter that we had a whole life together, and sure as hell didn’t matter that I had actually
WATCHED him die. Without it being said, what mattered was protecting the company. I stated that I
was supposed to be teaching the next day and that I needed to go in to keep myself from losing my
mind at home. The manager vetoed that idea and I was informed they would let me know when I
could return to work.


I requested PTO donations from my work family, and was told the CEO is requiring me to file for
FMLA, and informed that if it was denied I essentially could lose my job due to attendance. My
stress level increased and I was sure the world was literally going to come crashing down around me
at any moment.


My dad arrived the next day. When he walked through the door I watched his heartbreak for me in
way only a parent could recognize. I watched this man bury his wife a few years prior and never in a
million years did I think we would be able to understand this pain in each other on a personal level.
While it has strengthened our relationship in an extremely sad way, I know he now worries about his
first born child on a different level that terrifies him. He tells me all the time I’m the strongest
person he knows, but he has no idea how many times I’ve sat alone in my room breaking and trying
to figure out how I was going to make it to the next sunrise.


I picked up my girls from their dad, which Nolan usually did with me, and they immediately asked
where he was. When we got inside the house, I broke the news to them that he wasn’t coming
home. My middle daughter (9) rarely gets emotional, the tears and visible pain as the reality of what
I was saying set in took my breath away. My youngest daughter (5) was a lot more difficult to explain
the situation, when Nolan is brought up now she tells people “he’s my best friend and he’s in heaven
with the angels”.


Before my FMLA had been approved, it was agreed that I would not return to work until after Nolan’s
funeral. The days leading up to the service were a rollercoaster to say the least. My birthday came
and went, along with Kaitlin and Aaron’s, we still had the big party that was intended to celebrate
our trip around the sun, but instead we celebrated the life of the amazing person that became a part
of our chosen family. I spent time with my dad, hugged my babies a little tighter, enjoyed the
presence of all the people that showed up to take care of me, and prepared to say my final
goodbyes to a big piece of the puzzle that made up my life that was now missing.


My home was full for almost two weeks leading up to the services. Some of the nights blur together,
but a few significant memories stand out. It was a hard realization that I wasn’t the only one falling
apart and these amazing individuals were doing their best to take care of me while also grieving the
loss of their friend. Aaron and I sat at the foot of my bed, he held my hand and promised to get me
and my kids through this nightmare. Later that night while I was taking time to process alone, I
heard the song “You Should Be Here” playing, I peeked around the corner and I see Aaron sitting at
my dining room table with a beer in front of him, and one across in front of the other chair. He
cheers’d his to the one in the empty seat, took a sip and my heart broke even more.


Then…For my birthday my girlfriends got me a record player, sat me down on my bedroom floor and
Kaitlin told me she had 3 songs that reminded her of me and Nolan in some way. The album is
“Smithereens” by Joji, and the first song she played was “A Glimpse of Us”. She explained it was
how she pictured our relationship starting, we were both with other people and the situations were
awful but we leaned on each other as friends. The second was “Before the Day is Over”, she told me
it was how she pictured me talking to Nolan in those final moments begging him to let me help him.
The third was a song called “Die for You”, all 4 of us were in tears within the first 45 seconds of the
first song, but this was the true undoing. I sat there with tears that felt like they were on the verge of
drowning me, looking around at 3 of the most amazing, badass, strong, and caring women I’ve ever
come across…and their hearts were breaking right along with mine.


The day of the funeral came. Nolan’s dad had me get there early and held my hand all the way to the
casket so I could privately say my last goodbyes. As I got closer and stared at what was left of the
man I loved, my knees began to shake like they were going to give out from under me. Once again,
Aaron was there to hold me up and keep me from hitting the ground. The panic started to creep up
and the flashbacks to his final moments came like a tidal wave and I all but ran out of the funeral
home trying to breech the surface for air.


There is no way to describe the feeling of meeting Nolan’s mother for the first time in person with
his fire engine red casket in the background. As a mother I can’t even begin to imagine her pain.
Standing there simply being the woman who fell in love with her son, words cannot begin to express
the amount of gratitude and admiration I had for the woman in front of me. She was the life force
that created a person that loved me in ways I never thought were possible. Putting a face to the
woman I heard so many stories about from a man that held her in the highest regard not only as his
mother, but as a woman that created such a foundation for her sons still feels surreal. He had
compared me to her in so many positive ways in my own journey of motherhood I couldn’t help but
have the upmost respect for her even before I knew her name.


I was also contacted by a couple fire wives from the department Nolan had previously worked for.
This was shocking to me since our relationship wasn’t public knowledge. One of these beautiful
women told me “I know who you are and your grief deserves to be acknowledged”. She then put me
in touch with her husband who had mentored Nolan while he was a rookie firefighter. Their genuine
care and support means so much to me and I am forever grateful for their kindness although I was a
complete stranger to them.


The service was held on a Saturday and I returned to work on Monday. I was able to work Nolan’s
shift with Aaron my first day back. I’m so grateful to have someone I trusted with me to get me
through it. When I returned to work, I was met with coldness. My coworkers looked my way with
casual distant greetings, and I could feel the stares as I made my way through the building. Multiple
supervisors walked by me without so much as a hello or a second glance. At first I assumed it was
because no one knew what to say, but it continued for weeks.


I believe it was my 3rd or 4th shift back on the box, I ran a call that will haunt me almost as much as
losing Nolan does. We were dispatched for a psych patient and the call notes were far too similar to
my personal nightmare. It was a 17 year old girl barricaded in her room threatening suicide. The
problem with these calls is we never know if they have a weapon and we usually wait for PD to clear
us in. I immediately grabbed the radio and told dispatch we were making scene without PD. I raced
into the house, was met by her mother at her bedroom door with the handle broken off. I used my
pocket knife to pry the latch open and saw the most heartbreaking thing at my feet. This baby girl
was curled in the fetal position sobbing. The only thing I could picture was Nolan’s last moments on
this earth. My knees gave out and I hit the ground, pulling this sweet girl into my lap and crying with
her. Once we both could catch our breath, I told her Nolan’s story. By the time I finished, we were
both in tears again along with her parents, while my partner and PD stood there stunned. I asked the
girl if she would let me take her to get help, she grabbed my hand and didn’t let go until we got her
into the ER. We talked about life, and her dreams and goals. When I went to leave she told me “you
were supposed to be here, and I’m so happy I met you”. The rest of the day became a blur. As I was
finally coming off shift and heading to my car, a supervisor walked by and greeted me like he always
has. He did a double take and asked “how are you really doing?” I broke down in tears and all but
ran to my car as the now familiar panic was rising to the surface.


Weeks passed, rumors flew, and my mental health was spiraling. I hid my breakdowns from my
friends along with how much I was drinking on my days off. I snuck the empty liquor bottles out
when I’d leave for work so my best friend would continue to think I was still handling the situation in
a healthy manner. The nightmares were progressively getting worse and I was sleeping less by the
day. I stopped going to counseling due to the fact I’ve had to pay out of pocket for my sessions and
I was ashamed that not only did I let Nolan down, but also how out of control over myself I was. In
my mind, as a paramedic, it’s literally my job to save lives and I lost one that was so incredibly
important to me, and with that parents lost their son, boys lost their brother, my tribe lost their
friend…I failed them all.


Fast forward to 3 months after Nolan’s death. My leadership was still avoiding me, and I found out
that they had all decided to keep their distance after I made it very clear there was a conflict of
interest with the supervisor that refused to let me go to Nolan’s apartment that day. I reported to
upper management that not only did that supervisor send me inappropriate pictures through
Snapchat while on shift, he had previously stuck his tongue down my throat while I was resupplying
medications at a post. Our supervisor team collectively decided to keep their distance due to
something along the lines of “Kayla is going out swinging and she’s going to drag us down with her.”
Now, this is third party information, but knowing the things I do about a lot of people I work with,
this information was not surprising in the least. I didn’t have a lot of time or brain power to care after
receiving an email stating I was to report for a mandatory “After Action Review” with a panel of
people that were complete strangers to me. My entire friend group was also required to attend
along with several others.


I was not happy about this due to being told they waited months to do this review because the fire
department was taking over our company and they just didn’t have time with the merger. I had lost
all trust in my company and leadership at this point. I requested to have my friends and I go
together for support and was denied. I requested that Nolan’s fire mentor be with me for support
since we had become friends and I trusted him. I also requested another friend to accompany me
who is a retired police officer that is now a first responder chaplain. Again, my requests were denied
and I was given a corporate style answer as to why I had to go alone. I spoke with several people
and made the decision to just walk in and lay out all of the truth no matter if it cost me my job or
not. Nolan deserved to be fought for and I was willing to go to war for him.


About a week before the after action review I was pulled into the office by the manager I had
originally reached out to for help. I had considered this man and his wife friends of mine. They had
invited me for Thanksgiving knowing I didn’t have family here, we had gotten together for drinks,
and had trusted them both. In his office he made a statement about how he heard I was angry with
him and he was sorry it took him so long to reach out to me. Mind you, I passed his office everyday
at work so the opportunity to talk to me was very present. I started crying immediately and he
pulled me into a hug. We talked for a while before I went on shift and I thought we had made
amends. Until I realized how convenient the timing was considering my meeting with the review
panel was roughly a week away…and none of us knew if we would for sure have jobs once we
merged with the city. The heartfelt talk now feels more like a chess move to save his own ass.


I later found out from Nolan’s dad, the same manager reported to our legal department that he
ignored my texts for help because I’m “constantly asking for favors”. Those favors entailed me
offering to come in early or extend my shift to provide extra coverage in an already understaffed
system. It was another slap in the face of how far they’re willing to go to protect the company and
themselves.


A couple days before my meeting, a lieutenant reached out via phone call after she heard I was very
skeptical about this review. She wanted to put my mind at ease and assured me no one from my
company would be in attendance and that what I said would remain confidential. By now I was so
angry, hurt, sad, and lost that I probably would have said everything to my higher ups with a
megaphone if they had let me.


The day of my meeting rolls around and I show up as mentally prepared as I could get myself. This
would be the first time I told the details of that day in depth to people I have never met before. I was
on edge to say the least. The lieutenant and assistant chief I sat across from showed me nothing
but compassion and kindness. I laid out every detail to them, and when I told them the last words
Nolan said to me with tears streaming down my face, I saw the pain in their eyes and what looked
like tears ready to fall for us. We wrapped up the meeting and the lieutenant walked me out, she told
me to call her if I ever needed anything, and when I went to shake her hand she pulled me in for a
hug that I can only describe as a “mom hug”. It was so tight and full of care I almost cried again.


I immediately called the manager that had instructed me to let her know if I needed to decompress
before going on shift. She informed dispatch and kept me out of service, telling me to go grab some
food and collect myself. My partner and I grabbed dinner and about 45 mins later, while I was still in
tears another supervisor called me and told me I had been out of service long enough and I either
needed to go available or I’d be sent home with a possible attendance point if I was not able to
work.


It was clear the only choice I had was to get to work.


As the weeks went by, and the chaos calmed down a bit, the coldness subsided somewhat and I just
continued to go to work and live my life the best that I could. I was still having rough days and went
to my leadership for extra time at the hospitals after calls that hit too close to my personal hell.
Several times I was met with responses like “okay, but make it quick because the system is busy.”
There were a couple days I called off work when I could barely drag myself out of bed because the
weight of the grief was so heavy I could barely breathe and got little to no understanding with it
complete with write ups. I’ve spent countless nights waking up after rolling over to feel Nolan’s spot
empty and getting sent into a fear fueled panic. I’ve spent every shift at this company since that
awful day riding in essentially the same seat I watched him die in. To say this has taken a toll on my
mental health would be the understatement of the year, but I was given no other choice but to suck
it up and keep going.


I was never truly offered resources for my PTSD from my company even though I was on shift and
Nolan technically became my patient the second I pulled into his apartment complex. If my
supervisor hadn’t been there, I would have been the highest credentialed provider, meaning I would
have more than likely have been the one to pronounce his death. Not once was it taken into
consideration that this call would have been tough for any first responder because he was one of
us. Let alone the fact that we were friends, but add in the fact that we were in a relationship and I
watched him pull the trigger, then witnessed his life literally end…how anyone thought I would be
okay in less than two weeks before returning to work is beyond me.


Nolan’s birthday passed, and I attempted to get the day off, I bargained with a supervisor offering to
extend two shifts that week to make up the hours or I would go help teach the trainees like I do
regularly. I was told no almost immediately and asked what my plan was for his next birthday and
the one after that and the one after that. He told me PTSD doesn’t go away and essentially I
needed to figure it out. We ended up coming to a compromise after I couldn’t hold back my tears,
and he mentioned how I was doing great and less angry than when I first came back. Was I not
allowed to be angry?? Or hurt?? Or devastated?? Or traumatized??


To my leadership team that looked down on my grief…I’m sorry this was such an inconvenience for
all of you. I’m sorry that my emotions were too much for you to handle. But mostly…I’m sorry that
this company thought yall were the best options to lead us through an already tough career.


Now here I am a year later…the flashbacks still come in waves, the panic attacks will hit me out of
nowhere, I’m still looking for any way possible to cope whether it’s toxic or unhealthy or not.


I am just one example of PTSD in first responders. I’m just one example of how we are left behind
when we need help the most. Nolan Fansler is just one example of a precious life cut short due to
mental health and the price we pay in this line of work.


I’ve heard several people say things like “you CHOSE this career”…you’re right. I absolutely did
choose this career. I choose to go to work every day knowing there’s a chance I’m going to hold
someone’s hand as their soul leaves this world, hold a daughter while she sobs because she came
home to find her father dead and has no one to call, explain to a mother that we’re doing everything
we can while compressions are being done on her child, and every other horrible thing you can
fathom. I choose to come to work knowing I increase my own chances of dying and not making it
home to my own children in exchange for trying to save the lives of someone else’s loved ones. I do
it at the cost of my own physical and mental well being some days.


And I wouldn’t trade it for the world if that means I can keep someone else from feeling the pain of
loss I’ve become all too accustomed to.
