Stark Industries Case Study

     Summary

Phil J. Łaszkowicz




Introduction
When I originally read Ken’s tweet, I was
reminded of the continuous product placement
in the Iron Man films. From Sun SPARC servers,
through to Larry Ellison’s cameo at Stark Expo.



                      Not found




The idea that Tony Stark would use anything
other than Java seemed ludicrous. He’s a
bought and paid for Oracle stooge, surely. And
then I thought some more, and some more,
and… some more.

As a mostly satirical exercise, I considered my
own experiences of over 20-years working with
and for some of the largest companies on
technology projects, and I applied that
experience to produce a likely technology stack
employed at Stark Industries, assuming
(incorrectly) the Iron Man 3 timeline happened in
2017.

None of the following is a recommendation. In
fact, if I was asked to produce a stack for what a
modern Stark Industries / Iron Man would use
today, it would be quite different.

J.A.R.V.I.S.
Starting with J.A.R.V.I.S. we have to assume the
neural network which formed Tony’s assistive AI
was built prior to Berkeley’s Caffe, and indeed
prior to AlexNet. It takes time for such a
sophisticated neural network to be built, through
iterative improvements and recurrent learning
exercises. So it’s likely J.A.R.V.I.S. was built on a
custom C or C++ based neural network. I’d
suggest C++ the most likely language, as Stark
probably utilized Nvidia’s CUDA platform heavily,
and C++ is often the preferred language on
CUDA projects.

Over time J.A.R.V.I.S. would have taken on new
elements and functionality, and was likely a very
ad-hoc distributed convoluted neural network
used internally at Stark Industries. The persona
created by Tony for J.A.R.V.I.S. would have been
one component more unique to Tony’s
requirements than the company as a whole.
Take note Zuckerberg, Marvel’s J.A.R.V.I.S. is not
just home automation.

Of course, as time has moved on, so has the
technology J.A.R.V.I.S. was based on. Many of
the academics hired at Stark Industries were
avid MATLAB users, with some dabbling in
C/C++. Especially the aeronautical engineers.
Although there’s a lot of ugly code repositories
featuring examples of the C/C++ in use, much of
the academic work on the AI has moved to Caffe
and TensorFlow with Python. Although Caffe2 is
available, experimentally, none of the production
models are running in Caffe or TensorFlow
anyway, so there’s little incentive to move again.
The internal Stark Industries AI core
technologies are system proprietary C/C++
products.

The Suit
Although the Iron Man suit is meant to also run
J.A.R.V.I.S., it’s in-fact more likely that a sub-
component of J.A.R.V.I.S. is running within the
suit, (likely on an Nvidia Tesla GPU-based
solution – the suit is probably very toasty
inside), and the rest of J.A.R.V.I.S. is running
centrally on the (Oracle) cloud. There needs to
be an element of fail-over and network
redundancy support in-built, just in case, but the
core features of the suit could be managed by a
lightweight version of J.A.R.V.I.S. – disconnect
yourself from current reality; remember, this is
fiction folks.

Moving from the artificial intelligence for a
moment, the rest of the suit needs to be as
performant and energy efficient as possible.
Especially if there’s a Tesla GPU running in there.
So it’s ARM-based chips all round. The suit likely
has a collection of ARM Cortex-M chips for
general management and sensors, ARM Cortex-
R for the base of J.A.R.V.I.S., and an ARM
Cortex-A for the display interface. I would
assume the Mali GPU would exist to off-load
some of the heavier concurrent tasks too, like
computer vision for identifying objects. The
chip-sets used are likely to have been licensed
and augmented by Stark Industries to have
hardware-level support for specific features
Stark needs.

As far as the primary operating system in the
suit, although I suspect Tony used a custom
Assembler & C-based solution, I would hope
ARM’s mbed is in there somewhere, utilizing the
secure memory capabilities to reduce the
chance of threat-vectors being used in-flight.

The display itself is likely to use Qt (still primarily
with C++) with OpenGL / Vulkan running on Mali.
Although there would be a prototype React VR
experiment on-going, I doubt Tony would be so
experimental and unnecessarily GPU heavy in
the suit.

The Enterprise
So we’ve covered the cool kit. Let’s talk about
the enterprise. Stark Industries is undoubtedly
Java-based, as discussed. I assume the
company has a set of guidelines of what
technologies are acceptable for production,
what are experimental, and what are simply not
acceptable.

I would assume the majority of the business
uses Oracle Cloud-based services. In fact, we
know some of these details because Oracle
produced their own case study for us.

   “Jones is reusing some Stark Industries Java
   application design patterns and frameworks
   and collaborating with the company’s
   development and QA teams to deliver
   secure, device-independent Java-based
   apps to manage the custom business
   processes for this mission.”

In this, Oracle mentions use of Oracle Cloud
HCM for managing resourcing. It’s likely they’d
be using Oracle CRM On Demand (High
Technology Edition) for their sales management.
Remember, they’re Oracle bought and paid.
Stark Industries isn’t going to re-invent every
component of their business. The majority of
Stark Industries data is going to be housed on
Oracle Database, of course.

They’ll have a lot of varying Java apps they’ve
collected over the years running core elements
of the company. They’ll include a mixture of
Scala and Java code, with Tony preferring
Clojure personally. He seems like a functional
kind of guy or gets personal pleasure from
writing code most object-oriented developers
wouldn’t be able to grasp. Kotlin hasn’t landed
at Stark yet as these systems don’t see re-
writes. They’re enterprise-level and have had
years of maturity.

Client Solutions
For the client-facing web applications, Stark
Industries has moved most of its stack to
NodeJS. They found it quicker to work with and
easier to hire for. I’d like to think they use
TypeScript, but my gut tells me they’re a Flow
type of company. Naturally they’d also be using
React, with a few half-built Vue projects sitting
around. Again, React was easier to hire for as a
more popular tool, and once React VR was
announced it cemented the technology within
the company.

I assume there’s a lot of intelligence that goes
into the solutions Stark Industries produce. Not
all of it as powerful as J.A.R.V.I.S. Apache
Cassandra and Hadoop are utilized for
managing big data, with Spark and Mesos used
for scaling the computing and data clustering
needs.

On the Horizon
So, Stark Industries have abandoned weapons
and are more focused on impact solutions. As
they should be. What does that mean for their
stack? Well, it’s unlikely they’ll move from being
Java-focused anytime soon. Sure, their solutions
are likely now being migrated to Docker
containers, and Kubernetes has had some
success within Stark Industries, specifically on
Oracle Cloud and internal OpenStack solutions.
However Stark Industries has a wealth of
technical competency in Java and a huge code-
base that works well for the industry with little
incentive to move away. Perhaps a decrease in
revenue from abandoning the defense industry
may mean a reduction in licensing costs is
required, but they can just as easily move most
of their stack to Amazon Web Services, once
they work out how to re-engineer their in-house
Oracle data solutions.

Rust has seen increasing use for core file IO
tasks, and a select few embedded projects, and
there are some minor Go components now
being utilized to manage infrastructure, but
there’s little incentive for Stark to move from the
technology stack they’re familiar with, so those
components are purely considered part of the
experimental side to the internal development
efforts.

As for the suggestion on Twitter that they would
be using .NET – as much of a fit as that is for
McLaren Applied Technologies, a likely
competitor to Stark Industries, they’re already
knee-deep in the Oracle’s JVM, and Microsoft’s
.NET is the anti-thesis of that. The closest thing
to .NET I can imagine existing at Stark is
perhaps the odd case of MonoDevelop being
used on experimental Unity VR and AR projects.
Even then, I expect Unreal Engine is a better fit
with their considerable C++ experience.

Thanks
Perhaps I should have produced something
more time-relevant, like an analysis on the
convoluted neural networks that makes Star
Wars robots empathic, yet provides them with
no status greater in their society than slaves
amongst the republic, empire, or rebellion.
Perhaps that’s for another post. Hopefully you
enjoyed this little diversion to end 2017, so thank
you for reading!

Thanks to Daniel Cheung for the feature photo
provided (link below).

Daniel Cheung (@danielkcheung) |
Unsplash Photo Community

See the best free to download photos,
images, and wallpapers by Daniel
Cheung on Unsplash.
