                                                Newsletters

   Free. Fair. Local.


                         LOCAL GOVERNMENT



  Fort Worth prepares to
  welcome MedStar work-
   force into fire depart-
        ment, union
                            by Emily Wolf
                      January 16, 2025 5:18 pm


                   x                                




                                                                  
Members of IAFF 440 and the city of Fort Worth's
management team meet during a collective bargaining
session Oct. 9, 2024, at the Local 440 Jim Tate Building.
(Camilo Diaz | Fort Worth Report)



Sign up for essential news for the Fort Worth area. Delivered
to your inbox — completely free.



Last May, Fort Worth City Council members
unanimously approved a plan to dissolve the
region’s longtime EMS provider, MedStar. The
city opted to switch to a fire-based EMS system,
housed within its fire department.


That decision necessitated a lot of behind-the-
scenes work to make a fire-based system
feasible, including reopening collective
bargaining between the city and the union
representing its firefighters, IAFF 440. The
majority of MedStar employees have been
mapped over to equivalent positions with the
city, in an effort to retain talent during the
merger.


The city and IAFF 440 have been bargaining
over the details of that merger since July 2024.
They hosted multiple bargaining sessions, where
city management sat across the table from the
union’s board, and convened privately in several
subcommittees dedicated to hashing out the
essential details.


Key topics included which incoming MedStar
employees should receive civil service
protection; what their pay structures should
look like; and how to handle questions of
accrued vacation time and
seniority. Representatives from the city, the
union, and MedStar participated.


“We talked a lot about culture,” Assistant City
Manager Valerie Washington said in an
interview with the Report. “You have this new
workforce, and you don’t want to make them
feel less than the current workforce (of
firefighters). We did everything we could to
prevent and mitigate that from happening.”


In a Jan. 14 work session, Washington briefed
council members on the progress that has been
made up to this point, and presented a draft
agreement that the City Council will vote on Jan.
28. The agreement has an estimated cost of $54
million over 15 months, costs that include
around 75 new EMT positions on 12-hour shifts
and nine new ambulances.


Among the provisions in the agreement are an
average 10% salary increase for incoming
MedStar EMTs and paramedics; the creation of
new EMS job classifications; and civil service
representation for both EMTs, paramedics and
EMS telecommunicators.


“Our two main driving ideals were to serve the
citizens better and then take great care of these
people as they come over and become part of
our team,” Zac Shaffer, president of IAFF 440,
said.


Civil service protections weren’t always
guaranteed for telecommunicators. Early in the
bargaining process, the city suggested excluding
them from the bargaining group and instead
classifying them as general employees. The fire
union pushed back strongly on the suggestion,
and the city’s bargaining team ultimately
reconsidered and agreed to civil service
classifications for telecommunicators as well.


Shaffer noted that the fire department is the
only department whose telecommunicators are
currently in the civil service. The Fort Worth
police department’s telecommunicators are
considered general employees. The police
department has had persistent problems with
call center staffing, an issue Shaffer attributes in
part to a lack of civil service protections.


“We think that the best way to keep those call
rooms full, is to make sure that they’re
compensated well and they have a right to their
job,” Shaffer said.



     What is civil service?
     In the city of Fort Worth, both police
     officers and firefighters are sworn civil
     service positions. In a civil service
     system, hiring is conducted through
     examinations, and compensation is
     determined through a step process.
     Sworn employees have property rights to
     their jobs and representation through
     their department’s union. IAFF 440
     represents Fort Worth firefighters. Civil
     service for police officers and firefighters
     in Texas is implemented by Chapter 143
     of the Texas Local Government Code.



‘Get them on an equal playing field’

Holly Moyer, the city’s assistant human
resources director, was part of the city’s shift in
mindset with regard to telecommunicators.
Before she joined the city of Fort Worth in 2023,
she had previous experience working with fire
and EMS divisions in central Texas, which gave
her an experienced perspective on the issue.


She referenced the wording of local government
code Chapter 143, which specifies that a fire
department employee whose primary duties are
to provide emergency medical services is
entitled to civil service protection.


“That is what the telecommunicators are doing,”
Moyer said. “They’re on the call, and in that call,
they’re providing that service until the EMT and
paramedics get to the patient. So that’s just
something I think was a factor in that decision-
making process.”


Dianna Giordano, the city’s human resources
director, said another big part of this process
has been communicating the benefits of civil
service protection to MedStar employees.
MedStar employees have not previously had
union representation, and Giordano said there
are unique benefits to being civil service
employees, including guaranteed step pay
increases and exam-based entry and
promotional opportunities.


“It removes those individual influences from
hiring and promotion so that it’s a very
systematic process,” she said. “We’re trying to
communicate that as much as possible.”


Shaffer said IAFF 440 has had similar
conversations with MedStar employees
throughout the bargaining process. MedStar
employees were invited to the bargaining
sessions, and several sat in on the proceedings
throughout the year.


“They don’t really know us, right? They didn’t
elect me. They didn’t elect my board,” he said.
“And I think it was a foreign concept for them to
have somebody negotiate for them that’s not
even really part of their organization. But I think
the ones that attended the meetings were able to
see that we were really putting skin in the game
and trying to get them on an equal playing
field.”


He’s also had conversations with firefighters
about why the merger was necessary. Many
firefighters joined the Fort Worth Fire
Department because it didn’t run an ambulance
service, he said, and worried that dissolving
MedStar would change their own jobs.


“They thought this might mean that they’re
gonna all of a sudden be riding an ambulance
full time,” he said. “And the way that we’re able
to take care of the MedStar people as we’re
bringing them over, I think guarantees that we
will have an available workforce to staff those
ambulances.”


‘It’s history in the making’

Giordano said she hasn’t seen this kind of
merger in many other major cities, and Fort
Worth is acting as a trailblazer while it maps the
future of its new EMS system.


“It’s a huge task,” she said. “It’s a huge
undertaking. It’s history in the making.”


There’s plenty of work left to do after the council
approves the agreement. The city’s HR team has
tapped a consultant to help work through any
friction while merging the cultures of MedStar
and the Fort Worth Fire Department, a project
that will span throughout the year.


MedStar has served more than a dozen Tarrant
County cities and over 1 million residents as the
sole EMS provider for 38 years. The city is now
ironing out a subscription-based model of
service for the other cities that previously relied
on MedStar.


“And we don’t have an EMS budget in place for
the city of Fort Worth yet,” Washington said. “So
we will be going to the mayor and council in the
spring to set up the fourth-quarter budget for
EMS.”


Shaffer’s team is also hard at work figuring out
logistics ahead of the merger, which is expected
to take full effect in July. Deployment models,
infrastructure and scheduling are top of mind.


“We’ve got about 110 working days between now
and July 1,” he said. “And we have our work cut
out for us. But you know, it’s getting the team in
place and then saying, ‘Hey, listen, here’s what
we need, here’s what it will cost, and here’s our
timeline for getting it finished and wrapped up
and ready to go.’”




Related



Fort Worth Report is certified by the Journalism Trust
Initiative for adhering to standards for ethical journalism.




                   Republish This Story




        Republishing is free for noncommercial entities.
   Commercial entities are prohibited without a licensing
                 agreement. Contact us for details.




                TAGGED:       Collective bargaining

           emergency medical services        fire-based EMS

      Fort Worth Fire Department         IAFF 440       MedStar




                            EMILY WOLF
                   Government Accountability Reporter

  Emily Wolf was a local government accountability
 reporter for the Fort Worth Report. Originally from
   Round Rock, Texas, she spent several years at the
      University of Missouri-Columbia majoring in
                investigative... More by Emily Wolf



  Search …


                          Send us a story tip


                              LATEST NEWS
LOCAL GOVERNMENT

City Council approves up to $200K for Fort
Worth’s first Vietnam War monument
EDUCATION

Fort Worth ISD wants more community input on
its next budget. Here’s how you can help
BUSINESS

More than 450 cottage-style homes headed for
parts of east, south Fort Worth
BUSINESS

Fight over Fort Worth high-speed route contin-
ues as potential funding cuts could a!ect
projects
BUSINESS

Arlington’s growing population, tourism drive
demand for new cell towers
                           MOST POPULAR

Arlington shopping center reveals new park, amenities in
first phase of $30M renovation
Rail expansion expected to link Fort Worth’s TEXRail with
Dallas, Denton systems
Tuition at many Fort Worth private schools is higher than
proposed voucher amount
More than 450 cottage-style homes headed for parts of
east, south Fort Worth
Annual arts festival returns to downtown Fort Worth this
weekend. Meet 4 featured artists




MAILING ADDRESS: P.O. Box 50216, Fort Worth, TX 76105
PHONE: 817.405.9318
EMAIL: hello@fortworthreport.org


NEWSLETTERS
DONATE
Media Kit
Merch shop
Privacy Policy




Our Mission
We pledge to produce high-quality objective local journalism
that informs public decision-making, addresses the quality
of life of our community’s citizens, holds our policymakers
accountable and tells our readers’ stories by listening to
them and making sure they are valued and understood. In all
that we do, earning the trust and respect of our audience is
paramount. Our reporting will be free to all who access our
primary digital channels.




THIS SITE IS PROTECTED BY RECAPTCHA AND THE GOOGLE PRIVACY POLICY
AND TERMS OF SERVICE APPLY.

© 2025 FORT WORTH REPORT
POWERED BY NEWSPACK
