 Fort Worth takes
 control of MedStar
 management, creates
 new medical director
 office
 By Emily Wolf | Fort Worth
 Report
 Published December 11, 2024 at 10:05
 AM CST




 District 2 council member Carlos Flores listens during a    
 MedStar board of directors meeting on Nov. 21, 2024.
                                                       Camilo Diaz




 Seven months after voting to begin dissolving
 MedStar and create its own fire-based EMS
 system, the Fort Worth City Council officially has
 managerial control of the region’s longtime
 emergency medical services provider.

 At their Dec. 10 meeting, council members voted
 on a slew of items related to the transition. Chief
 among them was a resolution authorizing the
 city manager’s office to manage MedStar’s day-
 to-day operations during the transition period.

 That resolution was made possible by other
 Tarrant County cities — which are currently
 being served by MedStar — negotiating service
 agreements with Fort Worth. The majority of
 cities have signed an agreement at this point,
 and the city expects to get the final agreements
 shortly.

 The cities who sign the agreements will receive
 EMS services from Fort Worth, with costs
 dependent on how much time Fort Worth
 ambulances spend responding to calls in their
 jurisdictions. The transition to a new fire-based
 system is expected to move forward in July; the
 resolution is an interim measure ahead of that
 switch.

 Council members also approved the creation of
 a new city department, the Office of Medical
 Director. The department will be headed up by a
 medical director, reporting directly to the city
 manager and responsible for providing
 independent medical direction and oversight for
 Fort Worth’s EMS system.

 An existing Office of the Medical Director
 currently provides oversight to MedStar and
 various city fire departments across the county.
 The creation of the new department within Fort
 Worth’s governance structure will ensure that
 independent oversight continues past the
 transition period.

 The council also enshrined two advisory boards:
 the EMS Advisory Board and the Medical
 Control Advisory Board. They will provide
 guidance on EMS issues, similar to the existing
 advisory boards — the First Responder Advisory
 Board and the Emergency Physicians Advisory
 Board.

 The moves come as Fort Worth nears an
 agreement with the union representing its fire
 department employees over how to amend its
 collective bargaining agreement to account for
 incoming MedStar employees. The majority of
 those employees have been mapped over to
 other positions at the city and will work in new
 roles as part of the fire-based EMS system. A
 council vote on that amended agreement is
 expected in January.

 In addition to firefighters, the fire department will
 house employees whose sole role is to respond
 to medical emergencies. The anticipated cost for
 the switch is about $10 million.

 MedStar has served more than a dozen Tarrant
 County cities as the sole EMS provider for 38
 years. The organization was created through an
 interlocal agreement in 1986, after lackluster
 performance by private EMS providers. But
 MedStar fielded increasing complaints over the
 last few years, chiefly regarding response times
 and its inability to remain financially viable
 without subsidies from its member cities.

 Fort Worth has set aside $3.5 million in funding
 for the new EMS system in its 2025 budget,
 accounting for the last three months of that fiscal
 year. Come September 2025, City Council will
 make new increased general fund allocations to
 the fire-based EMS in its 2026 budget, in
 addition to fees it collects from other cities.

 This article first appeared on Fort Worth Report
 and is republished here under a Creative
 Commons license.

    News            Fort            MedStar            Fort          Ambulance
                    Worth                             Worth
                     City                             Report
                   Council




                  Emily Wolf | Fort Worth
                  Report
                  Emily Wolf is a local government
                  accountability reporter for the Fort
                  Worth Report. She grew up in Round
                  Rock, Texas, and graduated from the
                  University of Missouri-Columbia with a
                  degree in investigative journalism.
                  Reach her at
                  emily.wolf@fortworthreport.org for
                  more stories by Emily Wolf click here.
                  See stories by Emily Wolf | Fort Worth
                  Report




Related Content




 1 Fort Worth prepares to dissolve MedStar
    board, establish new governance structure


 2 Fort Worth, fire union open bargaining over
    how to merge MedStar and fire department


 3 Fort Worth eyes transition from MedStar to
    fire-based EMS




    Stay Connected




                        © 2025 KERA News



                             KERA


                     KIDS AND FAMILY


                         KERA ARTS


                      TELLYSPOTTING


                           KXT 91.7


                      PRIVACY POLICY


                       TERMS OF USE


                        CONTACT US
