    FORT WORTH

    Merging Medstar EMS & Fort
    Worth Fire: What's at stake?
    The merge is expected to launch in 12 to 18
    months, putting it in the Spring or Fall of 2025


    By Tahera Rahman • Published July 12, 2024 •
    Updated on July 12, 2024 at 6:35 pm




NBC Universal, Inc.

A blueprint aimed at shaving critical seconds off slowed
                                                                  
emergency response times continues coming together. Fort
Worth Fire is taking over EMS operations with a goal of getting
paramedics to patients faster. NBC 5’s Tahera Rahman has
the update.




  Rolling EMS services from a contractor, MedStar,
  into the Fort Worth Fire Department: It's a beefy
  mission that the city set out on hoping to shave
  response times.

  For the first time on Friday, the fire department,
  firefighters association, city staff, and MedStar
  employees came to the table to talk about what the
  transition plan will look like.


     Watch NBC 5 free wherever you are

           WATCH HERE



  “Just figuring out, you know, EMTs, Paramedics,
  supervisors. What’s the… rank structure look like?
  What does the hierarchy look like?” said Michael
  Glynn, Fort Worth Professional Firefighters
  Association President, during the meeting.

  He estimates that the department will be bringing
  on 400 or more new employees.



     Get top local stories in DFW delivered to
     you every morning with NBC DFW's News
     Headlines newsletter.

           SIGN UP



  Glynn said that'll decrease workload and contribute
  to better response times.

  “I fully expect that we’re going to have more people
  responding to calls on a daily basis.”

  Leaders discussed not only how to match up
  contracts and pay, but safety and certification
  requirements.

  Local
  The latest news from around North Texas.


                           2 HOURS AGO
                           New partnership aims to
                           boost homeownership,…
                           wealth through
                           churches
                           2 HOURS AGO
                     More North Texas
                     students lose visas as…
                     Trump Admin moves to
                     track immigrants on
  No decisions were made, only plans to further
                     social media
  discuss some finer points among committees
  before coming back to the table on July 26th.

  NBC 5 asked what's at stake if the major merger
  hits a road bump once it's launched.

  “Is there any concern here that if y’all don’t time this
  right, do this right, that response times will actually
  suffer instead of get better?" asked NBC 5's Tahera
  Rahman.

  Glynn said he was confident there wouldn't be any
  issues.

  Fire Chief James Davis said there is a risk.

  “Well, there’s always a risk of that because of a
  couple of different things: The uncertainty of what
  continued growth in the community is going to look
  like. We’re a community that’s been growing an
  average of 20 to 25,000 people a year in the six
  years I’ve been here," Davis explained.

  He said the department's job is to keep the fire
  department adapting and growing, in response to a
  growing community.

  Glynn said he's confident the new structure they're
  building now will stand the test of time.

  "We’re all going to work together in a better fashion
  than we have before because we’re all going to be
  working under one organization, one fire
  department," he said.

  According to an outside study that initially
  proposed different EMS models for the City of Fort
  Worth, incorporating EMS into the fire department
  would cost $10.5 million dollars-- not including
  capital costs, like buying ambulances and
  buildings.

  Glynn said they are planning to buy ambulances
  and replace old ones, but he doesn't have an
  updated cost estimate.

  The merge is expected to launch in 12 to 18
  months, putting it in the Spring or Fall of 2025,
  Glynn said.

  City Council members voted to make this move in
  May.



  This article tagged under:

  FORT WORTH




  CONTACT US                        KXAS Public Inspection File

  OUR NEWS STANDARDS                KXAS Accessibility

  NEWSLETTERS                       KXAS Employment Information

  PRODUCTS                          FCC Applications

  TV LISTINGS                       Privacy Policy

                                    Your Privacy Choices
  WATCH LIVE 24/7
                                    Terms of Service
  SUBMIT PHOTOS OR
                                    Advertise with us
  VIDEO
                                    Send Feedback

                                    CA Notice

                                    Ad Choices




  Copyright © 2025 NBCUniversal Media, LLC. All rights

  reserved




×        Open in the NBC DFW app
                      Exit mobile version
